
HERMANN

HESSE

DEMIAN

*


Translated by W. J. Strachan



London



Prologue


I cannot tell my story without going a long way back.
If it were possible I would go back much farther still to
the very earliest years of my childhood and beyond them
to my family origins.

When poets write novels they are apt to behave as if
they were gods, with the power to look beyond and com-
prehend any human story and serve it up as if the
Almighty himself, omnipresent, were relating it in all
its naked truth. That I am no more able to do than the
poets. But my story is more important to me than any
poet’s story to him, for it is my own — and it is the story
of a human being — not an invented, idealised person
but a real, live, unique being. What constitutes a real,
live human being is more of a mystery than ever these
days, and men — each one of whom is a valuable, unique
experiment on the part of nature — are shot down whole-
sale. If, however, we were not something more than
unique human beings and each man jack of us could
really be dismissed from this world with a bullet, there
would be no more point in relating stories at all. But
evcpy man is not only himself; he is also the unique,
particular, always significant and remarkable point
where the phenomena of the world intersect once and
for all and never again. That is why every man’s story


5



DEMIAN


is important, eternal, sacred; and why every man while
he lives and fulfils the will of nature is a wonderful
creature, deserving the utmost attention. In each indi-
vidual the spirit is made -flesh, in each one the whole of
creation suffers, in each one a Saviour is crucified.

Few people nowadays know what man is. Many feel it
intuitively and die more easily for that reason, just as I
shall die more easily when I have completed this story.

I cannot call myself a scholar. I have always been and
still am a seeker but I no longer do my seeking among
the stars or in books. I am beginning to hear the lessons
which whisper in my blood. Mine is not a pleasant story,
it does not possess the gentle harmony of invented tales;
like the lives of all men who have given up trying to
deceive themselves, it is a mixture of nonsense and
chaos, madness and dreams.

The life of every man is a way to himself, an attempt
at a way, the suggestion of a path. No man has ever
been utterly himself, yet every man strives to be so, the
dull, the intelligent, each one as best he can. Each man
to the end of his days carries round with him vestiges
of his birth — the slime and egg-shells of the primeval
world. There are many who never become human; they
remain frogs, lizards, ants. Many men are human beings
above and fish below. Yet each one represents an attempt
on the part of nature to create a human being. We
enjoy a common origin in our mothers; we all come
from the same pit. But each individual, who is himself
an experimental throw from the depths, strives towards
his own goal. We can understand each other; but each
person is able to interpret himself to himself alone.

6



I


Two Worlds


I begin my story with an event from the time when I
was ten years old, attending the local grammar school
in our small country town.

I can still catch the fragrance of many things which
stir me with feelings of melancholy and send delicious
shivers of delight through me — dark and sunlit streets,
houses and towers, clock chimes and people’s faces, rooms
full of comfort and warm hospitality, rooms full of
secret and profound, ghostly fears. It is a world that
savours of warm corners, rabbits, servant girls, household
remedies and dried fruit. It was the meeting-place of two
worlds; day and night came thither from two opposite
poles.

There was the world of my parents' house, or rather it
was even more circumscribed and embraced only my
parents themselves. This world was familiar to me in
almost every aspect — it meant mother and father, love
and severity, model behaviour and school. It was a world
of quiet brilliance, clarity and cleanliness; in it gentle
and friendly conversation, washed hands, clean clothes
and good manners were the order of the day. In this
world the morning hymn was sung, Christmas celebrated.
Through it ran straight lines and paths that led into the
future; here were duty and guilt, bad conscience and


7




DEMI AN


confessions, forgiveness and good resolutions, love and
reverence, wisdom and Bible readings. In this world you
had to conduct yourself so that life should be pure,
unsullied, beautiful and Well-ordered.

The other world, however, also began in the middle
of our own house and was completely different; it smelt
different, spoke a different language, made different
claims and promises. This second world was peopled
with servant girls and workmen, ghost stories and scan-
dalous rumours, a gay tide of monstrous, intriguing,
frightful, mysterious things; it included the slaughter-
house and the prison, drunken and scolding women,
cows in labour, foundered horses, tales of housebreaking,
murder and suicide. All these attractive and hideous,
wild and cruel things were on every side, in the next
street, the neighbouring house. Policemen and tramps
moved about in it, drunkards beat their wives, bunches
of young women poured out of the factories in the even-
ing, old women could put a spell on you and make you
ill; thieves lived in the wood; incendiaries were caught
by mounted gendarmes. Everywhere you could smell this
vigorous, second world — everywhere, that is, except in
our house where my mother and father lived. There it
was all goodness. It was wonderful to be living in a
house in a reign of peace, order, tranquillity, duty and
good conscience, forgiveness and love — but it was no less
wonderful to know there was the other, the loud and
shrill, sullen and violent world from which you could
dart back to your mother in one leap.

The odd thing about it was that these worlds should
border on each other so closely. When, for example, our


8



TWO WORLDS


servant Lina sat by the door in the living-room at even-
ing prayers and joined in the hymn in her dear voice,
her freshly washed hands folded on her smoothed down
pinafore, she belonged wholly and utterly to mother
and father, to us, the world of light and righteousness.
But when in the kitchen or woodshed immediately after-
wards she told me the story of the little headless man or
started bickering with her neighbours in the little
butcher’s shop, she became a different person, belonged
to another world and was veiled in mystery. And it was
the same with everybody, most of all with myself. Doubt-
less I was part of the world of light and righteousness
as the child of my parents, but wherever I listened or
directed my gaze I found the other thing and I lived
half in the other world, although it was often strangely
alien to me and I inevitably suffered from panic and a
bad conscience. Indeed at times I preferred life in the
forbidden world and my return to the world of light —
necessary and worthy though it might be — was often
almost like a return something less attractive, some-
thing both more drab and tedious. I was often conscious
that my destiny in life was to become like my father
and mother; pure, righteous and disciplined; but that
was a long way ahead; first one had to sit studying at
school, do tests and examinations, and the way always
led through and past the other, dark world and it was
not impossible that one might remain permanently in
it. I had read, with passionate interest, stories of prodigal
sons to whom this had happened. There was always the
return to their father and the path of righteousness that
was so fine and redeeming that I felt convinced that this


9



DEMI AN


alone was the right, good, worthy thing; and yet I found
the part of the story which was played among the wicked
and lost souls far more, alluring. *If it had been per-
missible to speak out and confess, I should have admitted
that it often seemed a shame to me that the Prodigal
Son should atone and be ‘found’ again — though this
feeling was only vaguely present deep down within me
like a presentiment or possibility. When I pictured the
devil to myself, I found no difficulty in visualizing him
in the street below, disguised or undisguised, or at the
fair or in a tavern but never at home.

My sisters belonged likewise to the world of light. It
often seemed to me that they were closer in temperament
to father and mother, better and more refined and with
fewer faults than I. Of course they had their defects and
their vagaries but these did not appear to me to go very
deep. It was not as with me whose contact with evil
could become so oppressive and painful and to whom
the dark world lay so much closer. My sisters, like my
parents, were to be spared and respected, and if one
quarrelled with them one always felt in the wrong after-
wards; as if one were the instigator, who must crave
forgiveness. For in offending my sisters, I was offending
my parents, which made me guilty of a breach of good
conduct. There were secrets that I would have been less
reluctant to tell the most reprobate street urchin than
my sisters. On good days when everything seemed light
and my conscience in good order, I enjoyed playing
with them, being good and kind to them and seeing
myself sharing their aura of nobility. It was like a fore-
taste of being an angel I That was the highest thing we


10



TWO WORLDS


could conceive of and we thought it would be sweet
and wonderful to be angels, surrounded with sweet
music and fragrance reminiscent of Christmas and happi-
ness. How rarely did such hours and days come along!

I would often be engaged in some harmless and author-
ized game which became too exciting and vigorous for
my sisters and led to squabbles and misery, and when I
lost my temper I was terrible and did and said things
that seemed so depraved to me that they seared my heart
even as I was in the act of doing and saying them. These
occasions were followed by gloomy hours of sorrow and
penitence and the painful moment when I begged for-
giveness and then, once again, a beam of light, a tran-
quil, grateful unclouded goodness for hours — or mom-
ents as the case might be.

I attended the local grammar school. The mayor’s
son and the head forester’s son were in my class and
sometimes joined me. They were wild fellows, yet they
belonged to the ‘respectable’ world. But I also had dose
relations with neighbours’ sons, village lads on whom
we normally looked down. It is with one of these that
my story begins

One half-holiday — I was little more than ten years old
— I was playing around with two boys from the neigh-
bourhood. A bigger boy joined us, a rough, burly lad of
about thirteen from the village school, the tailor’s son.
His father drank, and the whole family had a bad name.
I knew Franz Kromer well, and went about in fear of
him so that I felt very uneasy when he came along. He
had already acquired grown-up ways and imitated the
walk and speech of the young factory workers. With him


11



DEMI AN


as ringleader we climbed down the river bank near the
bridge and hid ourselves away from the world under the
first arch. The narrow strip between the vaulted bridge
and the lazily flowing river consisted of nothing but
general rubbish and broken pots, tangles of rusty barbed
wire and similar jetsam. Occasionally we came across
things we could make use of. We had to comb these
stretches of bank under Franz Kromer’s orders and show
him our discoveries. These he either kept himself or
threw into the water. We were told to notice whether
there were any items made of lead, brass or tin He
retained these together with an old comb made of horn.
I was very uncomfortable in his presence, not because I
knew my father would forbid this relationship but out
of fear of Franz himself, but I was grateful for being
included, and treated like the others. He gave the orders
and we obeyed as if it was an old custom, although it
was my first time.

At length we sat down on the ground; Franz spat into
the water and looked like a grown-up; he spat through a
gap between his teeth and scored a hit wherever he
aimed. A conversation started and the boys boasted
about their grand deeds and beastly tricks. I remained
silent and yet feared to offend by my silence and incur
Kromer’s wrath. Both my comrades had made up to
him, and avoided me from the start. I was a stranger
among them and felt that my clothes and manners were
taken as a kind of challenge. Franz could not possibly
have any love for me, a grammar schoor boy and a
gentleman’s son and I was in no doubt that the other
two, if it came to it, would disown and desert me.


12



TWO WORLDS


Finally, out of sheer nervousness, I began to talk. I
invented a long story of robbery, in which I featured as
the hero. One night in the corner by the mill a friend
and I had stolen a whole sackful of apples, not just
ordinary apples but pippins, golden pippins of the best
kind at that. I was taking refuge in my story from the
dangers of the moment and found no difficulty in invent-
ing and relating it. In order not to dry up too soon and
perhaps become involved in something worse, I gave full
rein to my narrative powers. One of us, I reported, had
always stood guard while the other sat in the tree and
chucked the apples down, and the sack had got so heavy
that in the end we had to open it and leave half behind,
but we came back half an hour later and fetched them
too.

I hoped for some applause at the end of my story; I
had warmed up to the narrative at last, carried away by
my own eloquence. The two smaller boys were silent,
waiting, but Franz Kromer gave me a penetrating look
through his narrowH. eyes. "Is that yarn true?” he
asked in a menacing tone.

"Yes,” I said.

"Really and truly?”

“Yes, really and truly,” I asserted defiantly while I
choked inwardly with fear.

"Can you swear to it?”

I was very afraid but I said ‘Yes’ without hesitation.

"Hand on your heart?”

"Hand on my heart;”

"Right then,” he said and turned away.

I thought this was all very satisfactory and I was glad

13



DE M I AN


when he got up and turned to go home. When we were
on the bridge I ventured timidly that I must go home.

"No desperate hurry/’ Franz laughed. "We go the
same way."

He sauntered along slowly and I did not dare to go
.ahead, but he was in fact going in the direction of our
house. When we arrived, and I saw our front door and
the fat doorknocker, the sun in the windows and the
curtains in my mother’s room, I breathed a sigh of
relief. Back home I O good, blessed home-coming back
to the world of light and peace I

When I had quickly opened the door and slipped in
ready to slam it behind me, Franz Kromer edged in too.
In the cool, gloomy paved passage which was lit solely
from the courtyard he stood close to me and said in a
low voice, "No hurry, you I ”

I looked at him terrified. His grip on my arm was
like a vice. I tried to guess what was going on in his
mind and whether he was going to do me some mischief.
If I were to let out a loud and vigorous shriek would
some one above be quick enough to save me? But I
gave up the idea.

“What is it?” I asked, “what do you want?”

"Oh nothing much, I merely wanted to ask you some-
thing. The others needn’t hear.”

"Well? What do you want me to tell you? I must go
up, you know.”

“I suppose you know who owns the orchard by the
corner mill?”

"No, I don’t. The miller I think.”

Franz had put his arm round me and drawn me close


14



TWO WORLDS


to him so that I couldn’t avoid looking into his, face at
close range. He had an evil gleam in his eyes and he
gave an ugly laugh. His face was full of cruelty and
sense of power.

“Yes, kid, I can tell you who owns the orchard. I’ve
known for a long time that people have been stealing
apples and I also know that the man in question said he
would give two marks reward to anyone who could tell
him who stole the fruit.”

“Heavens!” I exclaimed. “But you wouldn’t let on to
him?”

I felt that it would be futile to appeal to his sense of
honour. He belonged to the ’other’ world; betrayal was
no crime as far as he was concerned. That much was
clear to me. The people of the ‘other’ world were not
like us in these matters.

“Not let on ! My dear fellow, do you think I can mint
my own money and produce a couple of marks out of a
hat? I’m poor. I haven’t a rich father like you and if I
can earn two marks I’ve got to earn them. He might even
give me more.”

He suddenly left me. Our house passage no longer
smelt of peace and safety; the world was tumbling about
my ears. He would denounce me as a criminal; they
would inform my father, perhaps the police would come.
All the horror of Chaos' threatened me; the outlook for
me was horrible and dangerous. The fact that I had not
committed a theft was a mere detail. I had sworn that
I had. God in heaven! Tears welled in my eyes. I felt
that I should have to buy myself out and I groped
desperately. Not an apple, not a pen-knife; nothing.

*5



DEMI AN


Then I remembered my watch. It was a silver watch but
it did not go. I just wore it 'like that.’ It came to me from
my grandmother. I quickly drew it out.

"Kromer,” I said, “You mustn’t tell; it would be a
beastly thing to do. Look, I’ll give you my watch; un-
luckily it’s the only thing I have, but you can have it.
It’s made of silver,’’ I added nervously. “It’s good work-
manship and it’s only got some slight defect which can
easily be put right.’’

He smiled and took the watch in his large hand. I
looked at that hand and felt how rough and hostile it
was towards me and how it was trying to tighten its grip
on my life and peace of mind.

"It’s silver,” I repeated nervously.

“I don’t give a damn for your silver and your old
watch ! ” he said with withering scorn. "Get it repaired
yourself I”

"But Franz,” I exclaimed, trembling with fear lest he
walk off. "Just wait a moment! Take the watch 1 It
really is made of silver, honestly. And I haven't got
anything else.”

He gave me a cold, scornful look.

"Well, you know who I’m going to see. Or I might
even inform the police. The sergeant is a friend of
mine.”

He turned as if to go. I held him back by his coat
sleeve. He must not go. I would much rather die than
have to suffer what would happen if he went off like
that.

"Franz,” I implored, hot with emotion, "don’t do any-
thing stupid! It is a joke, isn’t it?”

16



TWO WORLDS


“It’s a joke all right, but it might be an expensive one
for you.”

“Just tell me, Franz, what I am to do and I’ll do what-
ever you like ! ”

His eyes narrowed and he laughed again.

"Don’t be a fool I” he said with false good humour.
"You know as well as I do. I can earn two marks and
I’m not rich; you know I can’t afford to chuck them
away. But you’re rich; you’ve got a watch. You’ve only
got to give me two marks and everything will be all
right.”

I grasped his logic. But two marks! It was far away
beyond my means and as unattainable as ten, a hundred,
a thousand marks. I did not have any money. There was
a money-box which mother kept for me and it contained
a few ten and five pfennig pieces put in by uncles when
they came to visit us and by other family Mends on
similar occasions. Apart from that I had nothing. I was
not given any pocket money at that age.

"I haven’t got an. hing, honestly,” I said gloomily.
"I haven’t any money. But I’ll give you anything else.
I’ve got a book about Indians and soldiers and a com-
pass. I’ll fetch it for you.”

Kromer merely contracted his lips in an evil sneer
and spat on the ground.

"Talk sense!” he commanded. "You can keep your
stupid rubbish. A compass! Don’t make me angry, do
you hear, and hand over the money ! ”

"But I haven’t any. They don’t give me any. I can’t
do anything about it!”

"Bring me two marks tomorrow morning then. I’ll

»7



DEMI AN


wait for them downstairs after school. See you ^bpve them
ready, or you’ll find out what happens if you don’t.”

"Yes, but where am I\ going to get them from when
I haven’t got any?”

“There’s plenty of money in your house. That’s up to
you. Tomorrow after school then. And I tell you ... if
you don’t bring it . . .” he flashed an intimidating
glance at me, spat again and vanished like a shadow.


I felt unable to go upstairs. My life was wrecked. I
thought vaguely of running away and never returning or
of drowning myself. I sat down in the dark on the
bottom step of our outside staircase, withdrew into my-
self and abandoned myself to my misery. Lina found
me there weeping when she came down with a basket
to collect some firewood.

1 begged her to say nothing about it, and went up-
stairs. On the right of the glazed door hung father’s hat
and mother’s sunshade; an atmosphere of homeliness
and affection hung about all these things; my heart
warmed to them gratefully as that of the Prodigal Son
must have done when he was confronted with the sight
and smell of the old familiar rooms of his house. But
none of this was mine any longer; it all belonged to the
world of my parents and I was deeply and guiltily en-
gulfed in the alien tide. I was involved in excitement and
wrong-doing, threatened by the enemy, beset by dangers,
fear and scandal. The hat and the sunshade, the good
old sandstone floor, the large picture over the hall cup-
board and the voices of my elder sisters coming from the

18



TWO WORLDS


living-room, it was all more moving and precious
than ever but it had ceased to be a comfort and some-
thing I could rely on and had become a kind of re-
proach. This was no longer my world; I could have no
part in its cheerfulness and peace. My feet were defiled;
I could not wipe them on the mat; I was accompanied
by shadows of which this world of home knew nothing.
I had had plenty of secrets, plenty of scares before but
it had all been light-hearted compared with what I was
bringing back with me that day. Fate was tracking me
down, hands were reaching for me from which my
mother could not protect me; of which she knew no-
thing. What my crime was — theft or lying — (had I not
sworn a false oath by God and everything that was
sacred?) — did not come into it. My sin was not this or
that; my sin was that I was in league with the Devil. Why
had 1 associated with him? Why had 1 listened to Kromer
more than I had ever done to my father? Why had I
lied about that theft, fathered myself with crime as if it
had been a heroic deed? And now the Devil held me in
his clutches, the enemy was at my shoulder.

For the time being my fear was not of the next day,
it was the horrible certainty that I was treading the
downhill path that led into darkness. I felt that my first
lapse was bound to be followed by others and that my
presence among my brothers and sisters, my demonstra-
tions 'of affection towards my parents were a lie, that I
was living a fate and a lie that 1 was hiding from them.

For a moment a flash of confidence and hope lit inside
me as I stood looking at my father’s hat. I would tell
him the whole story, the judgment he passed and the

19



DEMIAN


punishment he meted out would make him into my
confident and saviour. It would only mean the kind of
penance I had done often enough, a difficult and painful
hour, a difficult and rueful request for forgiveness.

How sweet it all sounded. How tempting it was ! But
it was no use. I knew that I would not do it. I knew that
I now had a secret, a debt which I had to work out for
myself. Perhaps I was at the parting of the ways, perhaps
from now on I would always belong to the wicked,
depend on them, obey them, become one of their num-
ber. I had played the man and hero and now I must
bear the consequences.

I was glad that my father upbraided me about my
muddy shoes. It side-stepped the issue, the graver sin
passed unnoticed and I got away with a reproach which
I secretly transferred to the other affair. In so doing, a
strange new feeling lit up inside me, an unpleasant,
ruthless feeling, full of barbs — I felt superior to my
father! For the moment I despised his ignorance; his
reprimand about the muddy boots seemed trivial. “If
you only knew,” I thought, and felt like the criminal
who is being tried for stealing a loaf of bread when he
has confessed to a murder. It was an odious, hostile
feeling but it was strong and it somehow fascinated me
and took a firmer hold of me than any other aspect of
my secret and my guilt. Perhaps, I thought, Kromer has
already gone to the police and denounced me and while
I am being treated here as a small child, storm? are
gathering above my head!

This was the all-important and permanent element in
the whole experience as I have related it. It was the first

80



TWO WORLDS


crack in the sacronsanct person of my father, a first in-
cision in the pillar on which my childhood's life had
rested but which every man must destroy before he can
become his own true self. The real, inner line of our
fate consists of these experiences which are hidden from
other people. A gash or wound of this kind grows
together again; it is healed and forgotten, but in the
inner recesses of our minds it lives on and bleeds.

I was so horrified by this new feeling that I would
willingly have fallen at my father’s feet and begged for-
giveness. But you cannot crave forgiveness for anything
fundamental and a child is as deeply aware of that as
any wise man.

I felt the need to reflect on my problem and plan out
my course for the next day; but I failed completely. It
was as much as I could do the whole evening to try and
acclimatise myself to the different atmosphere in our
sitting-room. Wall-clock and table, Bible and mirror,
bookshelf and pictures were likewise leaving me behind,
and I had to gaze at them with a frozen heart as I saw
my world, my good, happy life becoming a thing of the
past and breaking away from me. There was no escaping
the fact that new tap-roots held me firmly anchored in
a dark and alien land. For the first time in my life I was
tasting death, and death tastes bitter — for it is birth
pangs, fear and dread before some terrible renewal.

I was relieved when at length I found myself in bed.
Just before, as a final torment, I had been subjected to
family prayers an(l we had sung one of my favourite
hymns. But I could not join in; every note was gall and
bitterness. Nor could I join in the prayers when my


si



DEMIAN


father pronounced the blessing, and when he ended
“God keep us all ..." I felt rejected from the family
circle. The grace of Gpd was with them but not with
me. I went up, cold and exhausted.

When I had lain in bed for a while in warmth and
comfort, my heart once more turned back in fear and
hovered in a panic round the events of the day. Mother
had said her usual good-night, her step still sounded in
the room, her candle still glowed through a chink in
the door. Now I thought, she is coming back — she has
guessed — and she will give me a good-night kiss and
question me sympathetically about it all and then I can
cry and the lump in my- throat will meh and then I'll
hug her and tell everything and it will be all right again
and I shall be saved. After the chink in the door had
become dark again, I listened for a while, feeling that
it must and would happen.

Then my mind went back to the incident and I
seemed to be looking my enemy in the face. I could see
him clearly; he had screwed up one eye and his lips
were twisted in a leer And even as I watched, I was
consumed by the inescapable truth and he became big-
ger and uglier and a fiendish glint lit up his eye. He
stood dose beside me until I fell asleep but then 1
dreamed not of him and the day that was over but that
we were travelling in a boat, my parents, my sisters and
myself and we were surrounded by the peaceful and
heightened glow of a day’s holiday. I woke up in the
middle of the night still conscious of the after-taste of
that blessedness and my sisters’ white summer-dresses
still shining in the sun when I fell from Paradise back

as



TWO WORLDS


into reality and once more stood face to face with the
enemy with the ‘evil eye.'

Next day when mother came hurrying up and called
out that it was late and asked why I was still in bed, I
must have looked ill and when she asked if anything
was the matter with me, I had a fit of vomiting.

It was something gained. It was wonderful to be
slightly ill and allowed to lie in bed and drink camo-
mile tea and listen to mother tidying up in the next
room and Lina dealing with the butcher in the hall
outside. A morning off from school was something magic
and fairylike, the sun played in the room but it was
not the same sun they shut out with the green curtains
at school. But even that I could not enjoy today; it had
a false ring about it.

If I could only diet But, as on so many occasions, I
was only slightly ill and nothing happened. It saved me
from school but not from Kromer who was waiting for
me in the market place at eleven o’clock. And my
mother’s amiability bt ought me no comfort; it was heavy
and distressing. I pretended to be asleep while I pon-
dered over it all again. It was no use; I had to be at the
market at eleven o’clock. So I got up quietly at ten and
said that I was feeling better. It meant, as usual in such
cases, that I must either go to bed again or return to
school in the afternoon. I said that I wanted to go to
school. I had made a plan.

I could not go to Kromer empty-handed. I must get
hold of the little money-box that belonged to me. I knew
there was not nearly enough money in it; but it was,
something and I felt that something was better than

*3



DEM I AN


nothing and that Kromer at all costs must be appeased.

I felt guilty when I crept into my mother's room in
my stockinged feet and took my money-box from her
writing-table, but my conscience troubled me less than
on the previous day. My heart beat so fast that I nearly
suffocated and the situation was not improved when I
discovered on first examining it at the bottom of the
staircase that the box was locked. But it was not difficult
to force; it was merely a matter of breaking a thin tin-
plate grid. I felt terrible about breaking it — I was com-
mitting a theft. Before this I had done nothing worse
than pilfer lumps of sugar or fruit. But this was stealing
although it was my own money. I realized defiantly that
I was taking a step nearer to Kromer and his world and
that it was so easy to go down bit by bit. The Devil
might come for me now; there was no way back. I
counted the money nervously; it had sounded so much
in the box and was so painfully little in my hand. It
came to sixty-five pfennig. I concealed the box on the
ground floor, clasped the money in my hand and left
the house without passing through the gateway. I
thought I heard somebody upstairs shouting after me,
but I hurried away.

There was still plenty of time; I crept off by round-
about ways through the alleys of a transformed town
under clouds such as I had never seen before, past
houses which stared at me and men who eyed me with
suspicion. It occurred to me en route that one of my
school-friends had once found a florin in the Cattle-
Market. I wished I could pray that God might perform
a miracle and allow me to make a similar find. But I

*4



TWO WORLDS


had forfeited the right to pray. And in any case it would
not have mended the box.

Franz Kromer spied me coming from a distance but
he sauntered slowly towards me without appearing to
notice me. When he was close, he beckoned me imper-
iously to follow him and went quickly on down the
Strohgasse and across the road without once turning
round until he finally stopped before a new building
among the last houses. It had not yet been completed,
the walls stood bare; there were no doors or windows.
Kromer looked all around him hnd went in through the
gap for the door, and I followed. He beckoned to me
behind the wall and stretched out his hand.

“Have you got it?” he asked coldly.

I drew my clenched hand out of my pocket and
emptied my money into his flat palm. He had counted
it before the last five-pfennig piece had rattled out.

“There’s sixty-five pfennig here,” he said looking at
me hard.

“Yes,” I said nervously. "That’s all I have; I know it’s
not enough. But it’s all I have.”

"I didn’t think you were such a fool,” he reproved,
almost mildly, “things should be done right and proper
between men of honour. I won’t take anything from
you that isn’t correct, see. Take your nickel coins back,
there 1 The other chap — you know who— doesn’t try to
beat me down. He pays up.”

“But I haven’t any morel It was my money-box.”

“That’s your affair. But I won’t upset you. You can
still owe me one mark thirty-five. When shall I get it?”

“Oh, you’ll get it all right, Kromer. I can’t quite say


*5



DEMIAN


now — perhaps ill have some more money tomorrow or
the day after. You realise that I can’t breathe a word to
my father about this.” .

"That’s nothing to do with me. I’m not one to do you
harm. I could have my money by midday, you know, and
I’m poor. You’ve got good clothes on and get better
meals than me. But I won’t say anything. I’m prepared
to wait a bit. The day after tomorrow I’ll give you a
whistle at midday and then you can settle with me. You
know my whistle?”

He let me hear it, though I had heard it often enough.

"Yes,” I said, "I know it."

He went off as if I had nothing to do with him. It
had been a business transaction between us; nothing
more.


I think Kromer’s whistle would frighten me even
to-day if I suddenly heard it. It seemed to me that I
heard it, repeatedly. There was no place, game, work or
thought which his whistle did not penetrate, the whistle
which made me his slave and had become my fate. I
frequently went into our small flower garden pf which
I was very fond on those mild, colourful autumn after-
noons, and a strange urge prompted me to return to
some of the games of my earlier boyhood. I was playing
the part of someone younger than myself who was good,
frank, innocent and secure, but in the midst of all this,
always expected and yet horribly surprising and frighten-
ing, Kromer’s whistle would sound from somewhere,
interrupting my games and shattering my dreams. Then

*6



TWO WORLDS


I had to go and follow my tormentor to odious places,
render him an account and let myself be pressed for
payment. The whole affair had probably not lasted
more than a few weeks but to me they seemed years, an
eternity. Only rarely was I able to produce an odd five-
pfennig piece or a groschen stolen from the kitchen
table when Lina had left the shopping-basket there.
Each time I received a reprimand from Kromer who
heaped scorn on my head; I was cheating him, trying to
do him out of his rightful property. I was robbing him;
making him miserable 1 Rarely have I felt so distressed
in my life, never more desperate or so much in some one
else’s clutches. No one inquired about the money-box
which I had filled with counters and restored to its
place. But the scandal might break over my head any
day I was even more frightened of my mother when she
crept quietly up to me than of Kromer’s strident whistle
— was she coming to ask about the box?

As I had appeared before my persecutor without
money on many occasions, he began to find other means
of torturing me. He made me work for him. He had to
do various errands for his father which I had to do for
him. Or he required me to execute some difficult feat —
hop for ten minutes on one leg, attach a scrap of paper
to the overcoat of some passer-by. These tortures con-
tinued many a night in my dreams as 1 lay in the sweat
of a nightmare.

I began to feel ill. I kept having fits of sickness, and
was easily chilled but at nights I sweated again. Mother '
suspected some hidden reason and showed me a great
deal of sympathetic solicitude which only made me feel

*7



worse since I could not respond to her confidence.

One night she brought a piece of chocolate up to me
when I was in bed. It was an echo of earlier years when
I had often been vouchsafed similar little treats at night
if I had been good. Now she stood there, holding out the
chocolate. I felt so ill that I could only shake my head.
She asked me what was the matter and stroked my hair.
But I could only jerk out, “No. Nol I don’t want any-
thing 1 ’’ She deposited the chocolate on the bedside-table
and left me. When she tried to find out the reason for
my behaviour next day, I pretended not to understand.
On one occasion she sent for the doctor who examined
me and prescribed cold ablutions in the mornings.

My condition at that time was a kind of delirium. I
lived in the midst of the ordered peace of our house,
nervous and tormented like a ghost, with no part in the
life of the others and rarely able to forget my troubles
even for an hour. Towards my father who was often
irritated and called me to account, I was cold and
uncommunicative.



II


Cain


Salvation from my tormentor came from a totally un-
expected quarter, and at the same time I was conscious
of a new element in my life which has affected me right
up to the present day.

A new boy had just joined our school. He was the son
of a well-to-do widow who had come to live in our town
and he wore a mourning-band on his sleeve. He was
placed in a higher class than mine and was several years
older but he soon impressed me as he impressed every-
body else. This remarkable boy seemed older than he
looked; he did not in fact seem like a boy at all. He
moved among us more childish members of the school
strangely mature, like «. man, or rather a gentleman. He
was not popular; he took no part in games, still less in
the general rough and tumble and it was only the firm
self-confident tone he adapted in his attitude towards
the masters that won him favour with the other boys.
He was called Max Demian.

One day, as happened now and again, an additional
class was put in our large classroom for one reason or
another. It was Demian’s. We junior boys were having
a scripture lesson, the senior boys had to write an essay.-
While we were being told the story of Cain and Abel, I
kept glancing over towards Demian whose face held a


*9


DEMIAN


peculiar fascination for me, and I observed his bright,
clever, unusually resolute face bent diligently over his
work; he looked less like a schoolboy doing his 'prep.'
than a research student absorbed in some individual
problem of his own. He did not attract me; I was con-
scious, on the contrary, of a certain antipathy between
us; he was too self-possessed and cool, too defiantly con-
fident; his eyes had a grown-up expression — which never
commends them to young people — faintly sad, with
flashes of derision. But I could not help staring at him
whether I liked him or not; hardly had he given me one
glance, however, when I immediately averted my head
in panic When I think back to it to-day and how he
looked as a schoolboy, I can certainly confirm that he
was different from all the rest in every respect; an indi-
vidual wholly in his own right, with his own personality
stamped on him Therefore — though he made every effort
not to impress — he bore himself and behaved in every
way like a prince moving about among peasants incog-
nito and taking great pains to look like them.

He was walking behind me on the way home from
school. When the others had run off, he caught me up
and greeted me. Even his style of greeting, despite the
fact that he imitated our schoolboy tone of voice, was
grown-up and courteous.

"Shall we walk along together for a while?” he asked
amiably. I was flattered and nodded. Then I described
to him where I lived.

"Oh, there?” Jtie smiled. "I know the house. An odd
thing has been built in above your front entrance; it has
always intrigued me.”


3 ®



I had no idea to what he was alluding and^ I was
amazed that he apparently knew our house better than I
did myself. The keystone of the arch had certainly a coat-
of-arms oh it but it had been worn smooth during the
centuries and had often been painted over; as far as I
knew it had nothing to do with ourselves and our family
history.

“I don’t know anything about it,” I said shyly. “It’s a
bird or something of the sort; it must be quite ancient.
The house is supposed to have belonged to a monastery
in the old days.”

“That might well be so/’ he said, nodding. "Have a
good look at it. I think the bird is a sparrow-hawk.”

We walked on; I felt very constrained. Suddenly
Demian laughed as if something comic had occurred to
him.

"Yes, I was there during your lesson,” he burst out.
“The story of Cain who bore the mark on his forehead,
wasn’t it? Do you like it?”

No; it was rare fc» me to like anything we had to
learn. I did not however dare to confess it; for I felt I
was being addressed by a grown-up. I said I liked the
story quite well.

Demian slapped me on the back.

"You don’t need to put on an act with me, dear chap.
All the same the story is really very remarkable, much
more so than most of the other stories that are taught
in class. Your teacher did not say much about it — just
the usual comment about God and sin and so on. But I
believe . . .” he broke off and asked with a smile "But
are you interested?”



DEMIAN


“Yes. I believe, then,” he continued, “that this story of
Gain can be interpreted differently. Most of the stories
we are taught are valid, and authentic but it is possible
to see them from another angle than that of the teachers’
and it gives them much more sense. You can’t feel satis-
fied with this Cain for example and with the mark on his
forehead as they explain it to us. Don’t you agree?
Someone may certainly kill his own brother in a quarrel,
and he may panic afterwards and eat humble pie. But
that he should be marked with a special ‘sign’ for his
cowardice that acts as a kind of protection and inspires
fear in everybody else is strange indeed.”

“It is,” I said, becoming interested in the subject. “But
what other interpretation could one give the story?”

He struck me on the shoulder again.

“Quite simple. What happened and lay behind the
whole origin of the story was the ‘sign.’ Here was a man
who had something in his face that frightened other
people. They did not dare lay hands on him; he im-
pressed them, he and his children. It is virtually certain
that he bore no actual mark on his brow like a post
mark I Real life isn’t as crude at that. Rather there was
some hardly perceptible mark, a little more intelligence
and self-possession in his eyes than people were accus-
tomed to. This man had power and they all went in awe
of him; he had a ‘sign.’ You can explain that how you
will. People always want whatever is comfortable and
puts them in the right. They were afraid of Cain’s
children; they bore a sign. So the sign was not inter-
preted for what it really was but the contrary. They
said that people with this sign were odd, as indeed they


3 *



CAIN


were. Men of courage and character always seem very
sinister to the rest. It was a sinister thing that a breed
of strange, fearless people should be going about, and so
they attached a nickname and a myth to this family as
a way of taking revenge and ridding themselves of guilt
for all the fear they had experienced. Do you see?”

“Yes — that means then that Cain was not really evil?
And the whole Bible story isn’t really authentic?”

"Yes and no. These ancient stories are always true in
a sense, but they are not always properly recorded or
given a correct interpretation. In short, I consider Cain
to be a fine fellow and they pinned this story on to him
merely because they were afraid of him. The story had
its basis in hearsay, the kind of thing people bandy
about, and it was true in so far as Cain and his children
really bore some kind of mark and were different from
other people.”

I was astounded.

"And do you believe that the business of the slaying
isn’t true either?” I asxed, fascinated.

“Oh, yes, that’s certainly true. The strong man slew
the weak. But we may well doubt whether it was his
brother. It isn’t important. Ultimately all men are
brothers. Thus a strong man slew a weak man. Perhaps
it was the deed of a hero, perhaps not. At all events the
other weaklings were now filled with fear, < omplained
bitterly and when they were asked, ‘Why do you not
slay him too?’ they did not reply, ‘Because we are
cowards,’ but, ‘We cannot. He has a sign. God hath
branded himl’ The fraud must have originated some-
how like that . . . But, I’m keeping you. Goodbye then!”


B


S3



DEMI AN


He turned into the Altgasse and left me standing there
more baffled than I had ever been before in my life.
Almost as soon as he nad gone everything he had said
seemed utterly incredible. Cain a noble man, Abel a
coward! The brand of Cain, a mark of distinction! It
was absurd; it was blasphemous and wicked. Where had
God been? Had He not accepted Abel’s sacrifice, did He
not love Abel? No, it was all nonsense. Demian had
wanted to fool me, lead me on and get me into trouble.
He was a devilish clever fellow and could talk, but he
couldn’t put that one over.

I have never before given so much thought to a Bible
story or any other for that matter. It was a long time
since I had forgotten Franz Kromer so completely, for
hours, for a whole evening in fact. At home I read the
story once again as it was written in the Bible; it was
short and unambiguous, and it was quite mad to look
for any special, hidden meaning. At that rate, any mur-
derer could masquerade as a favoured one of God! No,
it was nonsense. It was just Demian’s easy and attractive
way of telling these things as if everything were self-
evident; and then that look in his eyes!

There was something very wrong with me. I had
lived in a wholesome and unsullied world; I had been
a kind of Abel and now I was stuck so deeply in the
‘other’ world, I had fallen and sunk and yet, at heart,
I could not really help it. How was this? And now a
memory flashed through my mind which left me almost
breathless. On that fatal evening when my present
trouble had begun and I had been with my father, Lhad
suddenly seen through his world of light and wisdom!

34



CAIN


Indeed I myself who was Cain and bore that sign had
imagined that the sign was nothing to be ashamed of
but a distinction rather and that because of my wicked-
ness and ' misfortune I stood higher than my father,
higher than the pious and righteous.

I did not think the matter out as definitely as that,
but my thought was composed of all these elements; it
was a-stirring of strange emotions that hurt me and filled
me with pride at the same time.

When I considered how strangely Demian Jiad spoken
of the fearless and the cowards, how oddly he had inter-
preted the sign on Cain’s brow, how his remarkable adult
eyes had lit up, the question flashed through my mind
whether this Demian himself was not a kind of Cain?
Why did he defend him if he didn’t share the same feel-
ings? Why had he this power in his eyes? Why did he
speak so scornfully of the ‘others,’ the timid souls who
after all were the pious and chosen ones of the Lord?

These thoughts went round and round in my head. It
was a stone dropped *nto a well, and the well was my
youthful soul. And for a long time this matter of Cain,
the murder and the ‘sign’ formed an outlet for my
attempts at recognition, my doubts and criticism.


I observed that Demian exercised a fascination over
the other boys too. I had not breathed a word to anyone
about the Cain business but the rest also seemed to be
interested in him. At all events there were many rumours'
in circulation about the ‘new’ boy. If I only knew them
all, I thought, each one would throw some light on his

35



DEM I AN


character and have some significance. But I merely knew
that Demian’s mother was reported to be very wealthy.
It was also said that neither she nor her son ever
attended church. One boy wondered whether they might
not be Jews but they could equally well be Mohamme-
dans. Tales were also current of Max Demian’s physical
prowess. He certainly had greatly humiliated the strong-
est boy in his class who had challenged him to a fight
and called him a coward when he refused to fight. Those
who were present said Demian had just taken him by the
scruff of the neck with one hand and squeezed hard,
whereupon the boy had gone white and crept off. He
was unable to use his arm for days afterwards. The
whole of one evening it was rumoured that he had died.
For a time no assertion was too extravagant to be
believed, everything about him was amazing and excit-
ing. Then they had enough, temporarily at any rate. Not
much later there was further gossip among us; some boys
reported that Demian associated with girls and ‘knew
everything.’

Meanwhile my business with Franz Kromer followed
its inevitable course. I could not escape him, for even
when he left me in peace for a few days, I was still bound
to him. He haunted my dreams like my own shadow and
any spell that he failed to cast over me in reality my
imagination allowed him to cast in those dreams in
which I became utterly his slave. I lived in them — I was
always a great dreamer — and I used up my health and
strength more in these shadows than in real life. A
recurrent nightmare was that Kromer was torturing me,
spitting and kneeling on me and, what was worse, lead-

36



CAIN


ing me on to serious crimes — or rather not so much
leading me on as compelling me by sheer force of per-
sonality. The most horrible feature of these nightmares
from which I would awake, half-crazy, was a murderous
attack on my father. Kromer sharpened a knife and put
it in my hand and we stood behind the trees of an
avenue lying in wait for someone. But when that person
approached and Kromer conveyed to me by pinching
my arm that this was the man I had to stab, I saw that
it was my father. Then I would wake up.

Although preoccupied with these things, I certainly
did still think about Cain and Abel but I gave little
thought to Demian. When he first approached me, it
was, oddly enough, likewise in a dream. Once again I
was dreaming of torture and violence of which I was
the victim, but this time it was Demian who knelt on
me. And — this was a new feature and deeply impressed
me — everything that I had resisted and that had caused
me pain when Kromer was my tormentor I suffered
gladly at Demian’s ha;.ds with a feeling compounded as
much of ecstasy as of fear. I dreamed it twice but the
third time I found Franz back in his accustomed r61e.

I have long been unable to separate what I experi-
enced in these dreams from the reality. Be that as it
may, my bad relations with Kromer followed their
course and were not at an end when I had paid off the
sum owing to him with the fruits of my petty thefts.
No; he now knew about these thefts for he pestered me
with questions about the source of the money, and I was
more in his hands than ever. He frequently threatened
to tell my father everything but even then my fear was


37



DEMIAN


hardly as great as my profound regret that I had not
told father myself at the beginning. Meantime, miserable
though I was, I did riot regret it all, at least not the
whole time, and sometimes I believed that it was fated
to happen in this way. My destiny hung over me and it
was useless for me to try to escape.

Presumably my parents were considerably distressed
while this situation continued. A strange spirit had
come over me; I no longer fitted into our community
with which I had previously been so closely bound up
and I was often overcome with a wild hankering for it
as for some kind of lost paradise. My mother, it was true,
treated me more like a wayward than a sick child, but I
was better able to judge from my sisters’ attitude how
matters really stood. This attitude of extreme indulgence
towards me caused me infinite distress because it made
it plain to me that I was considered as one in some way
‘possessed,’ more to be pitied than blamed for his con-
dition but one, nevertheless, in whom the Devil had
taken up his quarters. I felt that they were praying for
me more than ever before and I was conscious of the
futility of their prayers. I often felt a burning need for
relief, a longing for sincere confession, but I knew in
advance that I would be unable to tell and explain it
properly either to my mother or father. I knew that it
would all be accepted sympathetically, that they would
be sorry for me but would not understand and that the
whole thing would be regarded as an aberration, whereas
in truth it was fate.

I realize that many people will be unable to credit a
child not yet eleven years old with such feelings, but

38



CAIN


this story is not intended for them. I am recounting it
to those who have. a better understanding of human
nature. The grown-up who has learnt to translate a
part of his feelings into thoughts, misses these thoughts
in the child and therefore finally denies even the experi-
ences themselves. But I have rarely felt and suffered
more deeply than at that time.


One rainy day I had been ordered by my tormentor
to go to the town square. There I stood and waited,
shuffling my feet among the wet chestnut leaves that
were still falling from the wet trees. I had not any money
but had put two pieces of cake on one side to take along
so that at any rate I might be able to give Kromer some-
thing. I was used to standing in a corner and waiting for
him, often for a very long time, and I put up with it
the way one learns to tolerate the inevitable.

At length Kromer ame up to me. He did not stay
long. He dug me in the ribs a few times, laughed, took
the cake, even offered me a damp cigarette and was more
friendly than usual.

“Ah, yes,” he said as he was leaving me, “before I
forget, you might bring your sister along next time, your
elder sister I mean. What is her name by the way?”

I failed to grasp his point and made no repiy. I looked
at him surprised.

“Don’t you get me? You are to bring your sister."

“Yes, Kromer, but it’s no good. I won’t be allowed to
do so and she wouldn’t come in any case.”

Hi* proposal did not surprise me; I saw it for what it


39



DEMIAN


was, a ruse and a pretext. It was the sort of thing he was
always doing — demanding the impossible, frightening
and humiliating me and then gradually relenting. I had
to buy myself off with money or some gift.

This time however he was quite different. He was
scarcely angry at all over my refusal.

“Well,” he remarked perfunctorily, "think it over. I
would like to meet your sister. All you need to do is to
bring her out for a walk and then I will come up to you.
I’ll whistle for you tomorrow and then we can discuss it
again.”

When he had gone something of the nature of his
request suddenly dawned on me. I was still completely a
child in these matters but I knew from hearsay that boys
and girls when they were a little older could do certain
secret and improper things together. It flashed on me all
at once how monstrous it was My resolution never to be
party to such a thing was made on the spot. But what
would happen and how Kromer would take his revenge
on me I did not dare to think. It was the beginning of
a new martyrdom for me, there were still worse things
in store.

Inconsolable, I walked across the empty square with
‘my hands in my pockets. Further torments and slavery.

I had reached that point in my thoughts when a deep,
cheerful voice hailed me. I was startled and began to
run. Some one was pursuing me; a hand fell gently on
my shoulder from behind. It was Max Demian.

I capitulated.

“Oh I It’s you ! ” I said doubtfully. "You gave me such
a fright!”


40



CAIN


He looked at me. Never had his expression seemed
more like that of a grown-up, a superior and perspica-
cious being than at that moment. We had not spoken to
each other for a long time.

“I'm sorry,” he said in his polite yet firm way, “but
look here, you oughtn’t to let yourself be frightened like
that.”

“But you can’t always help it.”

“So it seems. But see here; when you shrink back from
someone who hasn’t done you any harm, then that some-
one begins to think. He is surprised; it makes him in-
quisitive. The someone thinks that you are remarkably
nervous and comes to the conclusion that people are
always like that when they are afraid. Cowards are
always afraid, but I don’t believe that you’re a coward,
are you? Certainly you aren’t a hero either. There -are
some things that you are afraid of; there are people too
of whom you are afraid. And you oughtn’t to be. No;
one should never be afraid of any man. You’re not
afraid of me? Or are ’ou?”

“Oh no, not at all.”

“There you are. But there are people you are fright-
ened of?”

“I don’t know . . . leave me alone, what do you want
of me?”

I quickened my pace with thoughts of flight but he
kept up with me and I felt him glancing at me out of
the corner of his eye.

“Let us assume,” he began again, “that I am well-
disposed towards you. At any rate you’ve no need to be
afraid of me. Right then. I’d like to carry out an experi-

4i



DEMI AN


ment with you, it is quite a light-hearted one and you
may learn something that will prove very useful. Listen
then! I often try out ah art which is known as thought-
reading. There’s no black magic about it but if you
don’t know how it is done it seems uncanny. You can
cause people considerable surprise too. Well, we will try
the experiment. Now, I am fond of you or interested in
you and I would like to discover what it’s like inside
you. To do this I have already taken the initial step. I
frightened you. You are therefore in a nervous state.
How has that come about? You don’t need to be afraid
of anybody. When you are afraid of someone it means
you have provided that someone with some kind of lever.
You have done something wrong for example and the
other person knows this and by this means has acquired
a hold over you. You understand? It’s clear enough, isn’t
it?’’

I looked up helplessly at his face which was as serious
and intelligent as ever and good-natured too, but there
was no tenderness in his manner which was severe. It
had an element of righteousness or something akin to it.
I was hardly aware of what was happening to me. He
stood over me like a magician.

“Have you got my meaning?” he asked again.

I nodded. I was unable to speak.

“I told you thought-reading seems comic but it comes
about quite naturally. I could for example tell you
pretty accurately what you thought about me when I
once told you the story of Cain and Abel. But that has
nothing to do with the present case. I also consider it
possible that you once dreamed about me. But let’s for-


4 *



CAIN


get that too. You’re a bright lad and most of them
are so stupid ! I enjoy an occasional chat with an intelli-
gent person in whom I can have confidence. Do you
mind?”

"Of course not. But I don’t understand.”

"Let's keep to our light-hearted experiment. So, we
have discovered this much. The boy, X, is frightened —
he is afraid of someone — he probably shares a secret with
this other fellow which is very uncomfortable for him.
Isn’t that, roughly speaking, the situation?”

I succumbed to his voice and influence as in a dream.
All I could do was to nod. It was like a voice which
could only emanate from myself. A voice, indeed, that
knew everything better and more clearly than myself.

Demian slapped me on the back.

"So that’s what it is? I thought it might be. Now, just
one question. Can you tell me the name of the boy who
went off a few moments ago?”

I was terrified, my threatened secret curled back inside
me, afraid to come out into the daylight.

"What kind of boy? There wasn’t any boy there —
only me.”

He laughed.

"Tell me!” he laughed. "What’s his name?"

"Do you mean Franz Kromer?” I whispered.

He gave a satisfied nod.

"Good! You’re a sensible chap. We’ll become friends
yet. But first I must tell you something. This Kromer or,
whatever his name is, is a rotter. I can tell by his face
that he’s a scoundrel ! What do you think?”

"Oh yes.” I sighed, "he’s a bad lot all right, he’s the


43



DEMI AN


Devil himself t But he mustn’t hear about this. For God’s
sake he mustn’t hear. Do you know him? Does he know
you?”

“Don’t worry ! He’s gone off and he doesn’t know me
' — not yet. But I’d like to make his acquaintance. Does
he go to the village school?”

“Yes.”

“What class.”

“The top class. But don’t say anything to him I Please,
please, don’t say anything!”

"Don’t worry, nothing will happen to you. I don't
suppose you would care to tell me a bit more about this
Kromer fellow?”

“I can’t! No, leave me!”

He was silent for a while.

“It’s a pity,” he said. "We could have carried the
experiment one stage further. But I won't torment you.
But you do realize, don’t you, that your fear of him is
all wrong? A fear of that kind can be our ruin, we’ve got
to get rid of it, you've got to get rid of it and you must
get rid of it if you’re going to be any good. Do you
understand?”

"Certainly, you are quite right . . . but it’s no good.
You don’t know . . .”

"But you’ve seen that I know a good deal more than
you thought. Do you owe him some money?”

"Yes, that as well, but that’s not the main thing. I
can't tell you, I can’t.”

“Wouldn’t it help then if I gave you the sum of money
which you owe him? I could easily do so.”

"No, it’s not that. And I implore you not to say any-


44



CAIN


thing about it to anyone. Not a word! You’re making
me very unhappy.”

“You can rely on me, Sinclair. You can tell me your
secret some other time.”

“Never, never,” I cried loudly.

“Just as you like. All I mean is that perhaps you may
tell me more about it later. Voluntarily of course! You
don’t think I would behave like Kromer, I hope?”

“Oh, no — but you know practically nothing about it ! ”

“Nothing at all. I am merely thinking about it. And,
believe me, I would never follow Kromer’s example. And
you don’t owe me anything.”

We did not speak for a long time and I calmed down.
But I found Demian’s knowledge all the more puzzling.

“I’m going home now,” he said, gathering his coat
closer round him in the rain. "There’s just one more
thing that I would like to say, since we have got so far —
you ought to get rid of the fellow! If there’s nothing
else for it, kill him! I should be pleased and impressed
if you did. I would even lend you a hand.”

My fear returned again. The story of Cain suddenly
recurred to me. The whole thing seemed sinister to me,
and I began to weep silently. Too many strange things
were going on round me.

“Good then,” laughed Max Demian. "Go home now!
We’ll do something, though murder would be the sim-
plest. The simplest thing is always the best in such cases.
You’re in bad hands with friend Kromer.”

I found my way home and felt as if I had been away
for a year. Everything looked different. Between me and
Kromer stood something like the future, something in


45



DEMI AN


the nature of hope. I was no longer alone I And now for
the first time I saw how terribly alone I had been with
my secret all those weeks. And something occurred to
me over which I had often pondered, that a confession
JLO my parents would merely relieve me without entirely
redeeming me. Now I had almost confessed to some one
else, a stranger, and a feeling of relief rushed at me like
a strong perfume.


For all that, my fear was still far from conquered and
I was prepared for a long series of terrifying disputes
with my enemy. That was why it seemed remarkable
that matters were being allowed to drift so discreetly
and undisturbed.

For a whole day, two, three days, a week there was no
sound of Kromer’s whistle in front of our house. I
could not believe it and was continually on the watch
in case he might suddenly reappear when he was least
expected. But he continued to absent himself. Mistrust-
ful of my new freedom, I could not really believe in it
until at length I met Franz Kromer. He was coming
towards me down the Seilergasse. When he saw me, his
features were distorted in an ugly grimace, and without
more ado, he turned round in order to avoid meeting
me

It was an astonishing moment for me. My enemy was
running away from mel The Devil was afraid of me!
I felt a thrill of joy and surprise.

Demian showed himself again during those days. He
waited for me in front of the school.


46



CAIN


“Hello,” I said.

"Good morning, Sinclair. I only wanted to hear how
you were getting on. Kromer is leaving you alone, isn’t
he?”

“Are you responsible for that? But how then? How?
I can’t understand it. He’s kept right away.”

"That’s good. If he should turn up again — I don’t
think he will, but he’s an insolent fellow — just tell him
not to forget Demian.”

"But what’s the connection? Did you pick a quarrel
with him and thrash him?”

“No, I’m not keen on that sort of thing. I’ve merely
been talking to him as I did to you and made it plain
that it is to his own advantage to leave you alone.”

"Oh, but you haven’t paid him any money?”

“No, sonny. You had tried that method already.”

He made off, though I badly wanted to question him
and I was left with the oppressive feeling he always gave
me; it was an odd mixture of gratitude and awe, admira-
tion and fear, consent and inward hostility.

I resolved to see him again soon so that I could discuss
it all with him as well as the Cain business. But this was
not to be.

Gratitude is certainly not a virtue that I believe in
and to expect it from a child would seem false. So the
utter ingratitude I showed towards Max Demian does
not surprise me. Today I have no doubt whatsoever that
I should never have recovered, but would have been
ruined for life if he had not freed me from Kromer’s
clutches. Even at that time I was conscious of this libera-
tion as the greatest experience of my young life — but I


47



DE MI AN


deserted my liberator as soon as he had accomplished
the miracle.

There was nothing remarkable, as I have just affirmed,
about my ingratitude. The one strange thing was my lack
of curiosity. How was it possible for me to live another
day without drawing any closer to the secrets with which
Demian had brought me into contact? How could I
resist the curiosity to hear more about Cain, more about
Kromer, more about thought-reading?

It is hardly comprehensible and yet it was so. I sud-
denly saw myself extricated from the snares of the Devil,
and saw the world lying bright and joyful before me; I
was no longer succumbing to attacks of fear and suffoca-
ting palpitations. The spell was broken; I was no longer
damned and tormented, I was a schoolboy again. My
nature was striving to regain its equilibrium and com-
posure, seeking above all else to put away from me and
forget whatever was ugly and threatening. The whole
long story of my guilt and fright was slipping away from
my memory with incredible rapidity without leaving
behind any scars or ill effects.

I can also understand today why I was trying to forget
my saviour and helper with equal rapidity. From the
valley of sorrows of my damnation, from the frightful
slavery with Kromer, I was fleeing back with every fibre
of my damaged soul to where I had been happy and
contented — the lost paradise that was now opening up
again, the untroubled world of mother and father, to
my sisters, the smell of cleanliness, the at-oneness with
the God of Abel.

Already on the day following my short conversation

48



CAIN


with Demian when I was finally fully convinced of my
newly won freedom and had no fear of losing it again, I
did what I had so often and so desperately wanted — I
confessed. I went to my mother, I showed her the money-
box with its damaged lock and filled with counters in-
stead of money and I told her how long I had bound
myself through my own guilt to an evil tormentor. She
did not wholly grasp my story but she saw the money-
box, the change in my appearance, heard the change in
my tone of voice and felt that I was cured and restored
to her.

And now with heightened emotions I underwent the
ceremony of my re-admittance to the fold, the Prodigal
Son’s home-coming. Mother took me along to father, the
story was repeated, questions and exclamations of praise
were showered on me; both parents patted me on the
head and breathed great signs of relief. Everything was
marvellous, everything was like the fairy-tales, everything
was restored to a wonderful harmony.

I escaped into thi-. harmony with real emotion. I
could never be thankful enough at having regained my
peace of mind and my parents’ confidence. I became a
model home-boy, played more than ever with my sisters
and at evening prayers I sang all the favourite hymns
with the feelings of the home-comer who is saved. It
came from the heart; there was nothing false about it.

And yet my house was not really in order. It was that
fact alone that really accounted for my neglectful atti-
tude towards Demian, for it was to him that I should
have confessed. The confession would have been less
exaggerated, less emotional but much more fruitful for


49



DEMI AN


me. As it was, I was clinging with all my roots to my
former earthly paradise; I had returned home and had
been accepted in grace. -JBut it was not Demian’s world
nor was he suited to it. He too — though in a different
way from Kromer — was a ‘tempter’ and moreover my
link with the second, evil world with which I never
wanted to have anything more to do. I could not and
would not abandon Abel and glorify Cain now that I
myself had once more become an Abel.

That was the outward connection. The inner, how-
ever, was that I had escaped from Kromer’s and the
Devil’s hand but not through any power and effort of
my own. I had tried to tread the paths of the world and
they had been too slippery for me. Now, as the grip of a
friendly hand had saved me, I retreated to my mother’s
lap and the security of a pious and hedged-in childhood,
without as much as a glance at the world outside. I made
myself into someone younger, more dependent and child-
ish than I was. I had to replace my dependency on
Kromer by a new one for I was unable to walk alone. In
the blindness of my heart, I chose to be dependent on
my father and mother, on all the familiar and much
cherished ‘world of light.’ I already knew that it was not
the only one. If I had not followed this course, I would
have had to stick to Demian and confide in him. That
I did not do so seemed to me at that time on account of
my justifiable mistrust of his strange ideas, in reality it
was entirely because of fear. For Demian would have
been far more exacting than my parents; by means of
persuasion, admonition, mockery and sarcasm he had
done his best to foster an independent spirit in me. Alas,


50



CAIN


how well 1 realise that today. Nothing in the world is
more distasteful to a man than to follow the path that
leads to himself.

Yet six months later I was unable to resist the tempta-
tion, and during a walk I asked my father what one was
to make of the fact that many people considered Cain
better than Abel.

He was taken aback and explained that this was an
interpretation which was by no means new to our time.
It was one that had arisen already in Old Testament
times and it had been taught among sects which included
the ‘Cainites.’ But this heresy was, of course, merely an
attempt on the part of the Devil to destroy our beliefs.
For if one believed in the right of Cain and the wrong
of Abel, then it followed that God had committed an
error, that the God of the Bible was not the true and
only God but a false God. In reality the Cainites were
reputed to have taught and preached something of the
sort but this false doctrine had long disappeared and he
was surprised that a soiool-friend of mine should have
heard anything about it. At all events he warned me
gravely against harbouring such ideas.


5 »



Ill


Th e Th i ef


There is much that I could say about the happy and
tender incidents in my childhood days, the sense of
security which I enjoyed with my parents, my childish
affection and carefree, irresponsible existence in a gentle
and affectionate ambience. But my interest is reserved
for the steps that I took in my life towards self-realiza-
tion. All the pleasant points of repose, islands of happi-
ness, paradises whose magic was not unknown to me
can remain, as far as I am concerned, in the enchanted
distance; for it is not a world that I have any particular
desire to re-enter.

While I linger here in my boyhood days I am speaking
of things that were new experiences and carried me for-
ward with them.

These impulses came without exception from the
‘other’ world, were always attended by fear, constraint
and bad conscience; they were always revolutionary and
constituted a threat to the peace of mind in which I
would gladly have continued to live.

Then came years when once again I could no longer
hide from myself the existence of the old urge driving
me back into the world of light to hide there. My
gradual awareness of sex loomed up before me, as it does
before everyone, as an enemy and destroyer, as something


5 *



THE THIEF


forbidden, corrupt and sinful. What my curiosity had
hoped for, what my dreams, desire and fear aroused in
me, the great secret of puberty, did not fit into the
circumscribed happiness of my childhood’s joy.

I behaved like everybody else. I led the double life of
the child who is no longer a child. My conscious self
lived in the homely and sanctioned, my conscious self
denied the new world that was darkling round me. Side
by side with this, however, I lived in dreams, actions,
desires of a subterranean kind over which my conscious
life nervously constructed a series of bridges, for my
childhood’s world was falling apart. Like almost all
parents, mine made no attempt to foster the stirring roots
of life; no reference was made to them. All they did was
to go to endless trouble to bolster my hopeless attempts
to deny reality and continue to dwell in a child’s world
which was becoming more and more unreal and false.
It may be that parents cannot do much about it, and I
am not trying to reproach mine. It was my own affair to
see myself through and find my own way and like most
well-brought up children I managed it badly.

Every man goes through this period of crisis. For the
average man it is the point in his life when the demands
of his own fate are most at odds with his environment,
when the way ahead is most hardly won. For many it is
the only time in their lives when they experience the
dying and resurrection which is our lot, during the decay
and slow collapse of childhood when we are abandoned
by everything we love, and suddenly feel the loneliness
and deathly cold of the world around us. And a great
many, people stay for ever hanging on to this cliff and


53



DEMIAN

cling desperately their whole life through to the irrevo-
cable past, the dream oi the lost paradise which is the
worst and most ruthless of all dreams.

If X turn back the pages of my story, the sensations
•which announced the end of my childhood are too
insignificant to be mentioned. The important thing was
that the ‘dark world,’ the ‘other world’ was there again.
What had once been Franz Kromer was now embedded
in me. And in this way the ‘other world’ was gaining
power over me from outside.

Several yeais had gone by since the Kromer affair. At
that time the dramatic and guilty period of my life lay
far behind me and seemed to have melted away like a
brief nightmare. Franz Kromer had long vanished out
of my life; I hardly gave him a thought even when I met
him. However, the other important figure in my tragic
story, Max Demian, was no longer absent from my circle,
although for a long time he stood at the perimeter,
visible but out of effective range. Only gradually did he
come closer and radiate his strength and influence.

I am trying to think what I remember of Demian at
that time. It may be that for a year or more I did not
once speak to him. I avoided him and on the few occa-
sions when we did meet, he merely nodded to me. Some-
times I got the impression that there was a faint ring of
derision and ironical reproach in this friendliness but it
may have been my fancy. The experience I had shared
with him and the strange influence which he had exerted
on me were as though forgotten by both of us.

I am trying to conjure up his figure and now when I
think of him, I see that he was indeed present in my life.


54



THE THIEF


I can see him on his way to school, alone or , among
.others of the senior boys, and I can see him strange,
lonely and quiet, wandering aloof in their midst, sur-
rounded by his own aura, a law unto himself. Nobody
liked him, no one was on intimate terms with him
except his mother and even with her his relations seemed
to be those of an adult rather than a child. The teachers
mostly left him to himself; he was a bright pupil but
he made no attempt to please anybody, and now and
again we heard of sayings, comments or retorts which
he was rumoured to have made to one or other of the
teachers which, as examples of forthrightness and irony,
left little to be desired.

As I close my eyes and reflect, I see his image rise up
before me. Where was it? Oh yes, I have it now. He
was in the narrow lane in front of our house. One day I
saw him standing there, notebook in hand, sketching.
He was drawing the old coat-of-arms with the bird above
our front entrance. And as I stood concealed behind the
curtain, watching him, I felt a deep admiration for that
keen, cool, bright face turned towards the coat-of-arms;
it was the face of a full-grown man, a scholar or artist,
deliberate and purposeful, strangely clear and self-
possessed and with a discriminating eye.

I see him on another occasion a little later on, in the
street, when we were on our way home from school and
had stopped to look at a fallen horse. It lay still, har-
nessed to the shaft in front of a peasant-cart, snorting
plaintively in the air with dilated nostrils, bleeding from
a hidden wound so that the white street-dust at its side ,
was being slowly stained dark red. As I turned away


55



DEMI AN


with a feeling of nausea, I noticed Demian's expression.
He had not thrust himself to the front but stood right
at the back, looking elegant and at ease as usual. His
glance seemed directed at the horse’s head, and again it
showed that deep, quiet, almost fanatical yet passionate
absorption. 1 could not help staring at him for some
moments and it was then that 1 felt aware of a very
uncanny sensation in my remote consciousness. I saw
Demian’s face and remarked that it was not a boy’s face
but a man’s and then I saw, or rather became aware, that
it was not really the face of a man either; it had some-
thing different about it, almost a feminine element. And
for the time being his face seemed neither masculine
nor childish, neither old nor young but a hundred years
old, almost timeless and bearing the mark of other
periods of history than our own. Animals might look
thus, trees or stars. I did not know then, of course, I
did not feel exactly what I am writing about it now, as
an adult, but it was something of the kind. Perhaps he
was handsome, perhaps I found him attractive, perhaps
he repelled me too, I could not even be sure of that. All
I saw was that he was different from the rest of us, that
he was like an animal, a spirit or an image. I cannot
describe him except to say that he was different, un-
imaginably different from the rest of us. My memory is a
blank about everything else and perhaps even what I
have described is to some extent gleaned from later
impressions.

Only when I was several years older did I come into
close touch with him. Contrary to the usual custom,
Demian had not been confirmed with the other boys of

56



THE THIEF


his year, and once again rumours had been rife. It was
said that he was a Jew or a heathen, more likely, and
some boys were convinced that he and his mother had
either no religion or belonged to a fanatic and disrepu-
table sect. In this connexion I remember having heard
that he was suspected of being his mother’s lover. Prob-
ably the fact of the matter was that he'Kad been brought
up without any particular religion and this caused every-
body to forecast an unsavoury future for him. At all
events his mother decided not to allow him to be con-
firmed until two years after the boys in his class. So it
came about that for months he attended the same con-
firmation classes as I did.

For a time I completely avoided him; I did not want
to have anything to do with him; too many rumours and
secrets hung about him. and I was particularly disturbed
by my feeling of indebtedness towards him ever since the
Kromer affair. I had enough to do with my own secrets.
The confirmation classes coincided with the critical
period of my initiation into sex, and against my best
intentions my interest in matters of piety was thereby
considerably prejudiced. The things the pastor spoke
about lay remote in a quiet, holy reality of their own;
all very fine and precious, doubtless, but to me they
lacked the reality and excitement that the other world
possessed in the highest degree.

The more indifferent this attitude made me towards
religious instruction, the more interested I became in
Demian. A bond seemed to exist between us. And I must
choose this moment to follow up that thread in my life
as accurately as I can. As far as I remember, it all began


57



DPMI AN


one day in the early morning class when the light was
still burning in the schoolroom. Our scripture teacher, a
pastor, had embarked on the story of Cain and Abel. I
was still sleepy and only listening with half an ear. All
at once the pastor began to hold forth about the mark
of Cain in loud and excited tones. At that moment I
became aware of a stirring-up inside me, a kind of
challenge, and, looking up, I saw Demian’s face turning
round towards me from the front desks with that clear,
eloquent glance of his which might be expressing scorn
or gravity, you could not be sure which. He merely
looked at me for a moment, and suddenly I gave the
pastor’s words my fullest attention, listened to him
speaking of Cain and his mark, and felt deep within me
the knowledge that the thing was not as he was teaching
it, but that there was an alternative interpretation and
that criticism of his view was justifiable.

A fresh bond was forged between Demian and myself
in that moment. And, strangely enough, hardly was I
aware of this spiritual closeness between us when I saw
it tran$lated as if by magic into physical closeness. I had'
no idea whether he had managed to arrange it in that
way or whether it was fate — I firmly believed in strokes
of fate at that time — but a few days later Demian had
suddenly changed his place in the scripture class and sat
directly in front of me. I can recall how I enjoyed
smelling the fresh, delicate perfume of soap from his
neck in the midst of the miserable workhouse atmos-
phere of the over-crowded schoolroom ! And again, some
days later he had changed places again and was sitting
next to me where he stayed all through winter and spring)

5 8



THE THIEF


The morning lessons now were utterly transformed.
They no longer made me sleepy and bored. I looked
forward to them. We would often listen to the pastor
with the greatest concentration and a glance from my
neighbour sufficed to draw my attention to any remark-
able story or strange saying. Another kind of glance, a
very meaning one, sufficed to awaken critical doubts
inside me.

All too often however we were inattentive pupils and
paying little heed to the lesson. Demian was always a
model of good behaviour in his relations both to masters
and. fellow-pupils. I never caught him indulging in the
usual schoolboy pranks, never heard him guffaw or
chatter or incur the teacher’s displeasure. But quietly
and more by means of signs and glances than whisperings
he contrived to make me share in his preoccupations.
Some of these were most odd.

He told me, for example, which of the other boys
interested him and how he made them the objects of his
study. He knew a number of them very well. Sometimes
he would say to me before the lesson, “If I give you a
signal with my thumb, so and so will turn rourid and
look at us, or scratch his neck, and similar things.’’ During
the lesson, often when I had forgotten all about it. Max
would suddenly jerk his thumb in an odd way for my
benefit and I would steal a rapid glance at the boy he
was indicating and on each occasion the boy would make
the gesture willed upon him as if he were a puppet en
strings. I plagued Max to try this trick on a master but
he refused. Once however, when I came into the lessoq
and told him I had not learned my ‘prep’ and desperately


59



DEMI AN


hoped that the pastor would not ask me any questions,
he came to my rescue. The pastor was looking for a
pupil to recite a passage of the catechism, and his roving
eye alighted on my guilty face. He slowly strode up to
me, pointed his finger in my direction and already had
my name on his lips when all at once he became dis-
tracted, looked uncomfortable and fingered his collar,
walked up to Demian who resolutely met his glance,
and seemed to want to ask him something. But he
quietly turned away again, cleared his throat a few times
and chose another pupil.

Only gradually did I become aware that at the same
time as I was finding amusement in these jokes, I was
myself a frequent victim of a similar trick. I would have
the feeling on my way to school that Demian was walk-
ing a short distance behind me and when I turned round
I discovered he was there in reality.

“Can you really make another person think what you
want?” I asked him.

He answered quite readily in his quiet, factual, grown-
up way.

"No,” he said. “We haven’t free will, whatever the
pastor makes out. The other person can’t think what he
will any more than I can make him think what / will.
It is possible however to think hard about someone and
frequently guess what he is thinking and feeling and
then, more often than not, one can anticipate his next
move. It is simple enough only people don’t know it.
Naturally you need practice. There is, for example, a
species of moth in which the females are much less
common than the males. Moths breed like all animals,


60



THE THIEF


the male fertilizes the female who lays the eggs. If you
get hold of a female of this particular species of moth —
the experiment has often been tried by naturalists — the
males come flying to this female in the night for hours
on end. Just think 1 For several miles around these males
smell the only female in the district. We try to find an
explanation but it is difficult. They must have a sense
of smell or something; it is like the way good gun dogs
can pick up and follow what would appear to be an
imperceptible scent. Do you get the idea? It’s the kind
of inexplicable thing that nature abounds in. This,
however, I can say: if the females were as common as
the males among these moths, the latter would not have
such a fine nose! They’ve acquired that merely because
they’ve trained themselves to it. If an animal or a man
bends his whole will to a certain end, he achieves it. It’s
as simple as that. And that is how it is in the present
case. Examine a man closely enough and you’ll soon
know more about him than he does himself.”

It was on the tip of my tongue to mention the word
‘thought-reading’ and remind him of the scene with
Kromer which was now so remote; but the subject had
become taboo between us and neither he nor I ever
made the vaguest allusion to the fact that several years
ago he had seriously concerned himself with my life. It
was as if no previous relationship had ever existed
between us, as if each of us presumed the other had
forgotten about it. Indeed it happened on one or two
occasions that as we were walking along the street we
encountered Franz Kromer yet we neither of us ex-
changed a glance nor mentioned a word about him.

61



DEMI AN


“But what is this ‘will* business?” I asked him. “You
say that we don’t possess free will but then again you say
one only needs to fix one’s will resolutely on some objec-
tive to achieve it. It doesn’t make sense. If I am not
master of my own will, then I am not in a position to
direct it here or there as I wish.”

He slapped me on the back as he always did when he
was pleased with me.

"Good for you; I’m glad you asked ! ” he said laughing.
“You must always ask; you must always doubt. But it is
a very simple matter. If, for example, a night-moth
wanted to direct his will on a star or some equally remote
object, he would fail. He doesn’t even make the attempt.
He confines his search to what makes sense for him, that
is, what he needs, what is indispensable to him. And he
achieves the miraculous — he develops a magic sixth sense
which no other creature possesses but him I There is
more scope and interest in the case of human beings
than of animals. But even we are bounded within a
pretty narrow circle beyond which we may not stray. It
is all very well for me to imagine this or that, imagine
I will get to the north pole or some such idea but I can
focus my will strongly enough on it only if the wish is
really so deeply rooted within me that it permeates my
whole being. Once that is the case, once you feel what is
required of you from within, all is well and you can
harness your will like an obedient horse. It is no use,
for example, my undertaking to ’will’ that our pastor
shall take to wearing spectacles. It would be reducing the
thing to a game. Bui when that time in autumn I made
the firm resolution to be shifted from my desk in the

6s



THE THIEF


front of the class, it was effective. A boy suddenly turned
up whose name preceded mine in the alphabet and who
had been away ill before, and as someone had to take his
place, I was given it because my will was ready to seize
the opportunity."

"Yes,” I $aid, “I remember having a special feeling at
the time. From the moment when we took an interest in
each other, you began to get closer to me, literally. But
how did it come about? You did not come and sit by
me straight away; you were content to sit on the bench
in front of me occasionally, weren’t you? Why was that?”

"Yes; that is so; I did not know myself where I wanted
to be when I wanted to shift from my original place. I
merely knew that I wanted to sit further back. It was my
wish to get closer to you and that, to begin with, was
quite unconscious. At the same time your will accorded
with mine and helped me. Only when I found myself
sitting in front of you did I realize that my wish was
only half fulfilled and that my sole wish had been to
sit next to you.”

"But there wasn’t t new boy joining the class just
then.”

“No, but I was merely doing what I wanted at that
time and sat down next to you without further thought.
The boy with whom I changed places was too taken
aback to object. And the pastor too noticed on one
occasion that there had been a swop round — but every
time he had to do with me, something appeared to dis-
turb him. He knew my name was Demian and that some-
thing was wrong and that since my name began with a'
‘D’ I ought not to be sitting directly behind an 'S’ 1 But

63



OEMIAN


the thought did not penetrate his consciousness because
my will opposed it and because I continued to thwart
him. He kept noticing that something was odd and the
good man looked at me and tried to puzzle it out. But
I had a simple expedient. I stared him out on each
occasion. It*s a treatment very few people can stand.
They all become uncomfortable. If you want to get
something out of someone and you look him in the eye,
unexpectedly and resolutely and he doesn’t become ill
at ease, give it up I You’ll never get anywhere with him,
never. But that is a rare occurrence. In actual fact, I
know only one person with whom it is ineffective.”

“And who is that?” I asked him quickly.

He looked at me, his eyes narrowing as they did when
he became thoughtful. Then he turned away and gave
no reply, and though I was profoundly curious, I could
not repeat the question.

I believe, however, that he had his mother in mind —
he seemed very closely bound up with her. Yet he never
as much as mentioned her name and never took me along
to their house. I hardly knew what his mother looked
like.


Many a time I attempted to imitate him and fix my
will on something with such concentration that I was
certain to achieve it. They were wishes which seemed
urgent enough to me. But nothing happened; it didn’t
work. I could not bring myself to mention the matter to
Demian. I should have found it impossible to confess my
wishes to him. Nor did he ask me.


64



THE THIEF


Meantime cracks had begun to appear in my religious
faith. And yet my way of thought, which was very much
dominated by Demian’s influence, was very different from
that of my fellow pupils who boasted a complete un-
belief. For there were some such boys among us. They
would say, for example, that it was ridiculous and un-
worthy of men to believe in a God and that stories like
that of the Trinity and the Virgin birth were absurdities
and that it was a scandal that such stuff was being
hawked round in our times. But I did not share these
views. Even where my doubts lay, I knew enough from
my childhood’s experience about the reality of a pious
life such as my parents led and that it was neither
unworthy nor hypocritical. Furthermore I felt then, as
ever, the deepest awe before the truly religious. But
Demian had accustomed me to considering and explain-
ing the stories and articles of faith to myself in a less
hide-bound and more personal and imaginative way; at
any rate I gladly and willingly accepted the interpreta-
tions he urged on me. A good deal of it — such as the
Cain episode — was ir. eed more than I could take, and
on one occasion during the confirmation classes, he
frightened me with an idea which was, if possible, even
more startling. The teacher had been speaking of Gol-
gotha. The Bible account of the passion and death of
the Saviour had made a deep impression on me from
my earliest days. Very often as a small boy round about
the time of Good Friday after my father had read the
story of the passion to us, deeply moved and caught up,
1 had myself inhabited this sorrowful yet beautiful, pale,
ghostly monstrously living world of Gethesemane and

Q. 65



DEMIAN


Mount Golgotha, and when I heard Bach’s Matthew
Passion, the mournful, glowing power of the suffering
of that hidden world had sent mystic shudders through
me. Even today I find in this music and ill the ‘Actus
tragicus’ the epitome of all poetry and artistic expression.

At the end of the lesson in question Demian said to
me thoughtfully, “This story has something about it that
I don’t like, Sinclair. Read it through, pass your tongue
over it; there’s an insipid element in it. It’s this business
of the two thieves. Wonderful how the three crosses
stand next to each other on the Mount! But then why
this tract-like story about the honest thief! First he was
a criminal and had committed evil deeds, God knows
what, and now he melts and takes part in tearful scenes
of sorrow and repentance! What sense is there, I ask
you, in such repentance when he is only two steps away
from the grave? It’s nothing but one of your pious moral
tales, sugary and unconvincing, helped down with the
grease of sentimentality and an edifying background. If
you had to choose one of the two thieves today for a
friend or consider which of the two you would prefer
to trust, it certainly wouldn’t be the snivelling convert.
No, the other is the man and has real character. He
despises a conversion which for a man in his position
can only be a pretty speech, and pursues his own way
to the end; he does not forswear the Devil who must
have aided and abetted him at the eleventh hour. He
has character and there are only too few people of
character in the Bible. Perhaps he was a descendant of
Cain’s. Don’t you agree?”

1 was dumbfounded. I thought I was thoroughly fam-

66



THE THIEF


iliar with the accepted story of the crucifixion and I
now saw for the first time how little personal imagina-
tion I had brought to my hearing and reading of it. Yet
Demian’s new conception of it had for me a fatal ring;
it threatened to overthrow the solid beliefs in me . to.
which I felt I must cling. No; one could not turn every-
thing upside down in that way, least of all the holy of
holies. As usual, Demian noticed my opposition at once,
but before I could say anything, he interrupted - in a
resigned voice, “I know, it’s the old story, as long as you
don’t take the thing seriously! But there’s something I
would like to tell you : we are here dealing with one of
the places where one is very conscious of the weakness
of this religion. The point is that this God of both the
Old and New Testaments is a wonderful figure but not
what he purports to represent. He is all that is good,
noble, he is the fatherly, the beautiful, the most high,
the sentimental — all right! But the world consists also
of other things which are merely ascribed to the Devil.
And that half-section of the world is suppressed; it is
never mentioned. It is the same as the way they celebrate
God as the father of all life but the whole of sex-life
which is the basis of life itself they are silent about, or
indeed, whenever possible describe it as sinful and the
work of the Devil! I have no objection to people hon-
ouring this God Jehovah, far from it. But I consider that
we should sanctify and honour everything, the whole
world, not merely this artificially separated, official half!
Therefore alongside the divine service should be a Devil’s
service; that in my view would be right and proper.
Otherwise you must create a God for yourself who em-

67



DEMI AN


braces the Devil in himself and before whom you don't
have to drop your eyes in shame when the most natural
things in the world take place.”

Contrary to his noipial way, he had become almost
violent but immediately afterwards, he smiled again and
did not worry me further.

His words, however, went straight to my adolescent
heart. What Demian had said about God and the Devil,
about the godly-official and the suppressed Devil’s world
fitted in with my own ideas on the subject, my own
myth, the conception 1 had of two worlds or two differ-
ent halves of the world — the light and the dark. The
realization that my problem was a problem of all
humanity, a problem of all life and philosophy suddenly
swept over me like a holy shadow and I was overcome
with fear and awe when I saw how deeply my own
personal life was caught up in the eternal stream of
great ideas. This realization was not a joyful one
although to some extent gratifying and corroborative.
I found it hard and unpalatable because it contained a
note of responsibility, of self-reliance, something beyond
childish ideas; it implied standing alone.

For the first time in my life this deep secret was
revealed to me and I told my friend about my idea of
two 'different worlds’ which I had held since child-
hood.

He saw immediately that 1 was entirely in sympathy with
him and believed him to be right. But it was not his
way to exploit this knowledge. He listened to me more
attentively than he had ever done before and looked
into my eyes until I had to avert mine. For in his gaze


68



THE THIEF


I saw once again the strange look, the animal-like time-
lessness that had no age.

"We'll talk about it another time,” he said, forbear-
ingly, "I see that you have thoughts you are unable to
express. If that is so you must know that you too have
not lived so far according to your own conception of
life, and that is not a good thing. Only the ideas that we
really live have any value. You have known that your
'permitted* world was only half of the world and you
have tried to subjugate the second half after the manner
of the priests and teachers. It will not be to your benefit 1
It benefits no one once he has begun to think.”

I was profoundly moved.

"But,” I almost shouted, "there are genuinely foul
and forbidden things; you can’t deny that! They are
forbidden and we must renounce them, I know that
there is murder and all manner of vice; but merely
because it exists am I to go and become a criminal?”

"We won’t continue this discussion today,” said
Demian, trying to appease. "Thou shalt certainly not kill
— nor rape and kill girls. But you haven’t yet reached
the stage where you can understand what ‘permitted’ and
‘forbidden’ really means. You have only tracked down
part of the truth. The rest is still to come, you can be
quite sure of that. You have now had an urge in you
for about a year that is stronger than anything else and
is considered ‘forbidden.’ The Greeks and many other
races on the other hand elevated this impulse into a
godhead and honoured it at their great religious festivals.
What is ‘forbidden’ is not permanently so; it can change.
Even today any man can sleep with a woman once he

69



DEMI AN


has been to the priest with her and got married. With
other races it is different, even nowadays. Therefore
each one of us must discover for himself what is per-
mitted and what is forbidden as far as he himself is con-
cerned. It is possible never to do a ‘forbidden’ thing and
yet be a real villain. And conversely. Fundamentally it
is merely a question of complacency I Whoever is too
complacent to think for himself and be his own judge
manages to accommodate himself to the ‘shalt nots’ as
they exist at the present time. It is easy for him. But
there are others who are conscious of the commandments
in themselves; things are forbidden to them which every
man does every day of his life, and other things are per-
mitted to them which are otherwise prohibited. Every
man must stand alone.”

Demian suddenly seemed to regret having said so
much, and he fell silent. I could already grasp to some
extent, intuitively, what his reactions were. Although he
was in the habit of expressing his ideas in an agreeable
and apparently perfunctory manner, he could not toler-
ate ‘talking for the sake of talking,’ as he once told me.
He was aware of my genuine interest but he felt that I
treated clever conversation too much as a kind of game,
in short, without due seriousness.


As I read the last word ‘seriousness’ which I have just
written, another scene, the most striking I had ever
experienced with Max Demian in those still half-childish
days, leaps back to my mind.

The day of our confirmation approached, and the


70



THE THIEF


last lessons of the preparation by the pastor had to do
with .the Last Supper. It was a matter of great impor-
tance to the pastor who went to considerable pains to
explain it; something of a sanctified mood certainly
pervaded the atmosphere during those lessons. But it was
precisely during those last periods of preparation that
my thoughts were tied up elsewhere and, moreover, with
the person of my friend. While I looked forward to the
confirmation which was described to us as our solemn
acceptance into the community of the church, the
thought rose urgently within me that the value of the
last six months of religious preparation did not rest in
what we had learned but in Demian’s proximity and
influence. It was not into the church that I was ready to
be received but into something of an entirely different
nature, an order of thought and personality which I felt
must exist somewhere on earth and whose representative
or apostle was Demian, my friend.

I endeavoured to suppress this thought; I was anxious
to submit to the solemn ceremonial of the confirmation
service with a certain dignity, whatever happened, and
this did not seem to fit in at all with my new idea. Yet,
do what I would, the thought was present and it grad-
ually became linked in my mind with the approaching
church ceremony. I was ready to comprehend it differ-
ently from the others; for me it was to signify my accep-
tance into a world of thought as I had learned to exper-
ience it in Demian.

It was in those days that I once more engaged in a
vigorous argument with him; it was just before an
instruction class. Demian was reserved by nature and

7 *



DEMIAN


found no pleasure in my .talk which must have been
both pompous and precocious.

"We talk too much,” he said with unwonted serious-
ness. "Clever talk is of no value whatsoever. One merely
gets further and further away from oneself and that is a
crime. One should be able to crawl right into oneself
like a tortoise."

Immediately afterwards we entered the schoolroom.
The lesson began; I was careful to attend, and Demian
did not try to distract me. After a while I began to be
conscious of an odd feeling from the side where he sat
next to me, a chill or void almost as if the place had
somehow become unexpectedly empty. The feeling
became oppressive and I turned round. My friend sat
there upright with his shoulders braced back as usual.
But he looked different and a kind of aura that was
unfamiliar to me surrounded him. At first I thought his
eyes were closed but I saw that in fact they were open.
But they were not focused on anything; it was an unsee-
ing gaze, dead and turned inwards or staring into the far
distance. There he sat completely motionless; he did
not even seem to be breathing; his lips might have been
carved out of wood or stone. His face was pale, uniformly
pale like stone and his brown hair was the most living
thing about him. His hands lay on the desk in front of
him, lifeless and still, like objects — pieces of stone or
fruit, pale and motionless yet not limp; they were like
good, firm pods that had formed round a robust, hidden
life.

A shudder ran through me. He is dead, I thought. I
almost said it aloud. But I knew that this was not so. My


7 *



THE THIEF


eyes were fixed on that pale, stone mask, spellbound, and
I felt that here was the real Demian I What he had been
before when he had gone around and chatted with me
was only half of him, a person who for a time was play-
ing a part, adapting himself to it, joining in the game
to oblige me. The real Demian, however, looked like
this — stone, age-old, animal-like, stone-like, handsome,
cold, dead and yet with an alarming secret life within.
And round him hung this aura of quiet emptiness, this
ether and celestial space, this lonely death!

Now he has retreated completely within, I thought
with a shudder. Never had I felt so lonely. I had no
part in him; he was beyond my reach, farther away from
me than if he had been on the remotest island in the
world.

I could hardly grasp the fact that I was the only one
who noticed it; I felt that they must all be looking, all
shuddering I But no one paid any attention to him. He
-sat there like a graven image, as stiff as an idol and 1
cannot forget how when a fly alighted on his forehead
and crawled over his nose and lips not a muscle of his
face twitched.

Where had he withdrawn? What was he thinking;
what was he feeling? Was he in heaven or in hell? It
was an impossible question. When I saw him breathing
and alive again at the end of the lesson and his glance
met mine, he looked no different from before. Where
had he returned from, where had he been? He appeared
tired. The colour had come back to his face; his hands,
moved again but his brown hair looked somehow dull
and lifeless.

73



DEMI AN


The following days I gave myself up to a new exercise
in my bedroom. I sat rigid on a chair, stared into space,
held myself completely motionless and waited to see how
long I could hold out and what I should experience. But
I only succeeded in becoming tired and my eyelids began
to prick.

Shortly afterwards came the confirmation service of
which I can recollect nothing of importance.

Everything was transformed. My childhood tumbled
about me in ruins. My parents regarded me with a cer-
tain embarrassment. My sisters had almost become
strangers. A sense of disillusionment vitiated and blun-
ted my normal feelings and pleasures, the garden had
lost its fragrance, the forest its magic, the world stood
round me like a clearance sale of old rubbish, insipid
and with all its charm gone; books were so much paper,
music was a noise. That is the way the leaves fall round
an autumn tree; it is unaware of it, rain runs down it,
it is subjected to sun or frost and life slowly retreats. It
does not die. It waits.

It had been decided that I should go to another school
after the holidays and leave home for the first time.
Sometimes my mother approached me with particular
tenderness, taking leave of me, as it were in advance,
trying to inspire my heart with feeling of love and
nostalgic memory. Demian had gone away. I was left
alone.


74



IV


Beatrice


Without having seen my friend again, I went to St.

after my holidays were over. My parents accompanied
me and with every possible solicitude for my welfare
entrusted me to the care of a master at the grammar
school who was in charge of a boarding-house. They
would have been frozen with horror if they had realized
into what sort of world they were introducing me.

The question as ever was whether, given time, a God-
fearing son and useful citizen could be made out of me
or whether my temperament would lead me astray. My
last attempt to be happy in the shadow of my father’s
house and ambience had lasted quite a long time and at
intervals had been almost successful, but finally it failed
utterly.

The unaccountable emptiness and abandonment which
I began to feel during the holidays after my confirmation
— and how familiar I was to become with that thin, deso-
late atmosphere later 1 — was slow to leave me. My depar-
ture from home was not too much of an ordeal; I felt
ashamed that I did not feel more homesick. My sisters
wept for no reason but I could not weep. I was surprised
at myself. I had always been a sensitive and essentially
good child. Now I had completely changed. I had
acquired an attitude of indifference towards the outside


75



DEMIAN '


world and for days on end I was preoccupied with inner
voices and the dark, iorbidden streams which ran below
the surface. 1 had gronyn up* very rapidly in the previous
six months and now gazed on to the world, lean, over-
grown and unprepared. My boyish charm had vanished,
I even felt that it was impossible for anyone to love me
and I was out of love with myself. I often felt a great
longing for Demian; but no less often I hated, him,
holding him responsible for the impoverishment of
my life which I was dragging round with me like a foul
disease.

At first I was neither liked nor respected in our board-
ing-house. I was ragged to begin with, then avoided
and regarded as a hypocrite and a disagreeable odd
man out. 1 fell in with the part and even exaggerated it
and grumbled myself into a kind of with-drawnness
which the outsider must have taken for masculine cyni-
cism, whereas, if the truth were told, I often succumbed
to fits of gnawing melancholy and despair. In school
I had to subsist on scraps of knowledge that .had
accumulated in my days at home since the class was
somewhat less advanced than my previous one and I
got used to regarding my fellow-pupils rather contemp-
tuously as children.

It went on like this for a whole year and more; even
the first holiday periods at home did not strike any new
note and I was quite relieved to return to school again.

It was the beginning of November. During the weather
typical of that season I had formed the habit of going on
meditative walks on which I often enjoyed a kind of
ecstasy, tinged with gloom, cynicism and self-deprecia-

76



' BEATRICE


lion. One evening in the damp, foggy twilight, 1 strode
off through the environs of the town; the wide avenue
in a public park stood completely deserted and seemed
to beckon me to enter. The path lay thick with fallen
leaves which smelt damp and acrid as I shuffled my feet
among them with a kind of melancholy delight, and the
distant trees loomed huge, shadowy and ghostlike out
of the mist.

I stood irresolutely at the end of the avenue, stared
eagerly into the dark foliage and the humid fragrance'
of death and decay which awoke and as it were answered
some echo within me. How insipid life tasted 1

A man joined the main drive from a neighbouring
path, his cape swinging as he walked. 1 was about to
continue on my way when a voice called out, "Hello,
Sinclair 1"

He came up to me; it was Alfons Beck, the oldest boy
in the boarding-house. I was always glad to see him and
I had nothing against him beyond the fact that he was
always sarcastic and avuncular with all the junior boys.
He was reputed to be as strong as an ox and to have the
Headmaster completely under his thumb. He was the
hero of many legendary schoolboy episodes.

"What are you doing here?" he shouted affably in the
tone the senior boys assumed when they condescended to
one of us occasionally . . "Well, I’ll bet anything you’re
writing poetry I ”

"Never thought of it,” I replied brusquely, repudiat-
ing the notion.

He laughed, came closer and chattered in a way to
which I had long ceased to be accustomed.


77



DEMIAN


"You don’t need to be afraid that I don’t understand,
Sinclair. There’s something about strolling in the even-
ing mist that begets autumn thoughts and one feels in
the mood for composing verse, I know. About dying
nature, of course, and one’s lost youth which is like you.

■ See Heinrich Heine I ”

"I’m not as sentimental as that,’’ I objected.

“No offence! But in this weather, I think it’s a. good
idea to look out some spot where there’s a glass of wine
of something of the sort to be had. Are you coming
along? I’m on my own — or would you rather not? I
wouldn’t want to lead you astray, old man, you might
not want to risk getting a black mark ! ’’

Within a short time we were sitting together in a
small pub in the suburbs, drinking a doubtful wine
and clinking glasses. I did not take to it at all to begin
with but at any rate it was something new. Soon how-
ever, unaccustomed to wine, I became very loquacious.
It was as if a window in me had been broken and
the world shone in. It had seemed so long, so terribly
long since I had confided anything about my inner self
to anyone else. I began to be fanciful and in the middle
of it all I told him about the whole Cain and Abel
affair.

Beck listened eagerly — here at last was someone to
whom I could give something! He slapped me on the
back, called me a devil and a sly rogue and my heart
swelled with ecstasy at this opportunity of releasing my
cooped up longing to speak and communicate, of being
recognized and of counting for something with an older
boy. When he called me a sly rogue, the words seeped

78



BEATRICE


into my soul like a sweet, heady wine. The world glowed
in new colours, thoughts gushed out of me like a hundred
Audacious springs. The fire of enthusiasm burned inside
me. We discussed teachers at the school and our school*
friends and we seemed to have a perfect understanding
of each other. We talked of the Greeks and the pagan
world, and Beck was eager to induce me to confess my
love affairs. But I was out of my depth. 1 had had no
experience; I had nothing to relate. Moreover the wine
failed to release or enable me to communicate whatever
I had felt, built up or imagined though 1 was burning
inside Beck was much more knowledgeable about girls
and I listened to his tales with excitement. I heard
amazing things; things I would not have thought possible
were trotted out as part of everyday reality and seemed
quite normal. Alfons Beck had already gained experience
of women in his less than eighteen years of life. He had
learned, for example, that girls were only out for flirta-
tion and attention, which was all very agreeable but not
the real thing. There was more chance of that with
mature women. They were much more reasonable. You
could talk with Frau Jaggelt who kept the stationer’s
shop, and a book could not contain all the various
goings-on behind her counter.

I sat there spell-bound and stupefied. Certainly I could
never have loved Frau Jaggelt — but nevertheless it was
terrific. There seemed to be hidden springs as least for
my seniors, whose existence I had never suspected. It all
had a false ring about it, a more ordinary and insignifi-
cant*flavour than love should have, in my opinion, but
at all events it was life and adventure and I was sitting


79



DEMI AN


next to someone who had actually experienced it and
to whom it seemed a normal thing.

Our conversation had now left the heights and haft
lost its magic. Instead of being the ‘bright little fellow/
I had sunk to being a mere boy listening to a man. But
all the same — as opposed to what my life had been for
months on end, it was a cherished and heavenly experi-
ence. Furthermore it was, as I gradually began to realize,
forbidden fruit; from our presence there in the pub to
the subject of our discussion, all very forbidden. In any
case it smacked of cleverness and rebellion.

I remember that night with remarkable clarity. It was
late when we started on our way home by the wan light
of the gas-lamps in the cold, damp night air and I was
drunk for the first time in my life. But far from being an
agreeable sensation it was extremely distressing and yet
even that had a thrill and delightfulness of its own; it
was after all rebellion, debauchery, it was life and spirit.
Beck boldly took charge of me, cursing me hard at the
same time for a ‘bloody beginner,’ and half led, half
carried me home where he managed to bundle first me
then himself through an open hall-window.

The sober reality to which I painfully awoke after an
all-too brief drunken sleep was accompanied by an un-
accountable depression. I sat up in bed, still wearing
my everyday shirt; my clothes and shoes lay strewn round
about on the floor and reeked of tobacco and vomit, and
between fits of headache, nausea and a raging thirst a
picture rose before me such as I had long ago ceased to
look at. I saw my home, father and mother and Asters
and the garden. I saw my quiet, familiar bedroom. I saw

80



BEATRICE


school and market-place, Demian and the Confirmation
classes— everything about it was light, it had ah aura of
'brightness; it was all wonderful, righteous and pure.
And everything, as I now realized, that had been mine
only yesterday, nay a few hours before and was mine for
the asking, had at this very hour, this very moment,
depraved and cursed as I was, ceased to belong to me,
rejected me, regarded me with disgust. Every act of
affection and intimacy which I had experienced in the
distant, golden gardens of childhood, every kiss from
my mother, every Christmas feast, every bright summer
morning at home, every flower in the garden was blighted;

I had trampled it all down under foot. If informers had
come and tied me up and led me to the gallows as an
outcast and defiler of temples, I would have been ready
and gone willingly and considered it just and rightful.

So this was how I looked inside! I, who was going
round, despising the world! I who was proud in spirit
and shared Demian’s ideas! That was how I appeared
to myself — an outcast, a swine, drunk, besmirched, a
vile beast, brought low by my loathsome appetites!
That was how I looked to myself, I who had left those
gardens where everything was pure, bright, unquestion-
ing affection, I who had loved the music of Bach and
beautiful poetry! With mixed feelings of emotion and
revulsion I could still hear my own laugh — drunken,
uncontrolled, stupid bursts of laughter. That was I!

Yet in spite of it all, I almost revelled in my torment.
So long had I crawled along, blind and foolish, for so
long' had my heart cowered as it were silent and anaemic
in a corner, that even this self-reproach, this loathsome'

81



SEMI AN


feeling was welcome. At least it was emotion of some
kind; fire was kindled and my heart raced. Though
utterly routed I felt something akin to release and the
dawn of spring in the midst of my trouble.

Meantime, seen from without, I was rapidly deteriora-
ting. My initial orgy was soon followed by others. A good
deal of tippling and time-wasting went on among my
school-fellows. I was one of the youngest among those
who misbehaved in this way and I was soon no longer
merely a tolerated ‘y° un g un ’ but a ringleader and star,
a notorious and daring pub-crawler. I belonged once
more to the world of darkness, to the Devil and in that
world I was considered no end of a lad.

I lived in an orgasm of self-destruction, and while
among my friends I was thought of as a devil-may-care
leader and a devilishly smart and witty fellow, deep
down inside I was full of fear and anxiety. I remember
even now that tears sprang to my eyes when I saw
children playing in the street one Sunday afternoon as
I emerged from a pub, gay and happy with their freshly
combed hair and Sunday clothes. And while I often
amused and shocked my friends with outrageous cynicism
at beer-stained tables, in my inmost heart I was in awe
of everything I scoffed at and lay inwardly weeping on
my knees before my soul, my past, my mother and God.

There was a good reason why I was never in harmony
with my companions and remained lonely among them
and suffered because of it. True, I was a drunken hero
and mocker after the toughest heart. I displayed spirit
and courage in my thoughts and words about my
teachers, school, parents and the church — I listened to

8s



BEATRICE


smutty stories and even ventured on an occasional one
myself — but I never accompanied my friends when they
went out with girls. I kept to myself and was filled with
an intense longing for love, a hopeless longing, while,
to judge by my talk, I ought to have been a hardened
enjoyer of feminine favours. No one was more out-
rageous, no one more shameless than I. And when
occasionally I saw the young girls of the town walking
in front of me, pretty, clean, pleasant and innocent,
they seemed like pure wonderful dreams, a thousand
times too good and pure for me. For a time I could not
even bring myself to enter Frau Jaggelt’s stationery shop
because it made me blush to look at her, remembering
what Alfons Beck had told me.

The more I realized how perpetually lonely and differ-
ent from the others I was, the less able was I to break
away. I cannot now remember whether my drinking and
boasting really gave me any satisfaction. I never became
used to drinking to the extent of managing to avoid the
disagreeable after-effects on each occasion. It was as if I
was compelled to do all these things. I did what I had
to because I did not know what to do otherwise. I was
afraid of being alone for long and felt nervous when
confronted by the many shy and tender impulses which
continually attacked me and I was afraid of the thoughts
of love that so often surged up in my mind.

What I missed above all was a friend. I had two or
three school-mates whom I liked to see. But they be-
longed to the good types, and my vices had long been
an open secret. They avoided me. I was considered as a
desperate gambler on the brink of disaster. The teachers

83



D E M I A N

✓

knew a good deal about me, I' had been severely pun-
ished several times and my final expulsion seemed to be
merely a matter of tinje. As I myself knew, 1 had long
ceased to be considered a model pupil, but I forced
myself painfully along with the feeling that it could not
go on like this for ever.

There are many ways in which providence can make
us feel lonely and lead us back to ourselves. Sometimes
God seemed to accompany me. It was like a bad dream;
I see myself as a dreamer, spellbound, restless and tor-
mented, dragging my odious and unclean way over mud
and mire, broken beer glasses and nights filled with
cynical chatter. There is the kind of dream in which on
your way to the princess you get stuck in quagmires,
back lanes full of refuse and foul odours. That was how
it was with me. In this rough fashion my loneliness was
thrust upon me and I raised, as it were, between myself
and my childhood, a locked gateway to Eden with its
pitilessly resplendent host of witnesses. It was a begin-
ning,. an awakening of nostalgia for my former self.

I had not got rid of my fear. I still had shivering fits
as on the occasion when for the first time, alarmed by my
housemaster’s letters, my father appeared unexpectedly

in St. and came to meet me. When towards the end

of that winter he paid me a second visit, I was already
hardened and indifferent and allowed him to scold and
entreat me, and remind me of my mother. Finally he
grew angry and said that unless I improved he would
have me sent away from the school in disgrace and put
me in a reformatory. I wished he would I When he went
away that time, I pitied him; he had achieved nothing;

84



BEATRICE


he could no longer find a way into my heart and for
the time being I felt it served him right. I did not care '
what became of me. In my odd and unattractive way,
with my pub visits and outspoken attitude I was at
loggerheads with the world at large, ahd this was the
form .my protest took. I was ruining myself in the
process and sometimes it looked to me as if the world
could not find a better use for people like myself. If
they could offer no better place, no higher rewards,
people like me would come to grief. Well, the loss was
the world’s.

The Christmas holidays were a joyless affair that year.
My mother got into a panic when she saw me again. I
had shot up still more and my lean face looked grey and
wasted; my features had lost their tautness, my eyes were
red-rimmed. My incipient moustache and spectacles,
which I had recently acquired made me look odder
still. My sister recoiled, giggling. It was all very uncom-
fortable. My conversation with my father in his study
was uncomfortable; exchanging greetings with the hand-
ful of relations was uncomfortable and above all Christ-
mas itself was an uncomfortable business. Ever since I
had lived in our house it had been the great day of
festivity and love, gratitude and the renewal of the bond
between myself and my parents. This time it was merely
oppressive and embarrassing. As usual father read out
the passage about the shepherds abiding in the fields
‘watching their flocks’; as usual my sisters stood smiling
in front of the table on which the Christmas gifts had
been placed. But my father’s voice sounded displeased
and bis face looked old and hollow and mother was sad

85



DE M I AN


and the atmosphere painful and strained — presents,
Christmas wishes, Bible reading and illuminated tree—
everything seemed out of place. The gingerbread smelt
sweet and evoked a host of more agreeable memories.
The Christmas tree with its fragrance reminded me of
things as they had been in former days. I longed for
Christmas Eve and the holidays to be over.

It was like this the whole winter. Only quite recently
I had been solemnly warned by the masters at school and
threatened with expulsion. It could not go on much
longer. At least as far as I was concerned.

I had one special grudge against Max Demian, whom
I had not seen now for some time. I had written to him

twice at the beginning of my school term in St. but

had received no reply; so I had not called on him during
the holidays.

In the same park where during the autumn I had met
Alfons Beck, in the early spring when the hedges were
beginning to show green, I encountered a girl to whom
I felt an immediate attraction. I had gone out for a
solitary walk, my head filled with unsavoury thoughts
and worries, for my health had not been good and, to
make matters worse, I was in perpetual financial difficul-
ties. I owed sums of money to various friends and had
to keep producing presents by way of bribes, and in
several shops I had allowed bills for cigars and suchlike
to mount up. Not that these anxieties went very deep —
if my existence was to come to an end very soon and I
drowned myself or was transferred to a reformatory, these
trifling matters would never arise. But I lived face to
face with these ugly facts and they made me wretched.


86



BEATRICE


On that spring day in the park, then, I met a young
woman. She was tall and slender, smartly dressed and
had a boyish face. She attracted me immediately. She
belonged to the type I liked and she began to fill my
imagination. True, she was not much older than I but
much more mature. She was elegant and well-formed,
already a grown woman but with a touch of exuberant
boyishness in her face which made a particular appeal
to me.

So far in my life I had never managed to approach
a girl with whom I was in love nor did I succeed on the
present occasion. But the incident made a deeper im-
pression on me than anything before, and this infatua-
tion had a profound influence on my life.

Once more an image had suddenly risen up before me,
a lofty and respected image — alas, nothing could have
been deeper and stronger within me than my craving for
someone to worship and respect I called her Beatrice
for I knev’ about her, without having read Dante, from
the reproduction of an English painting I had kept. It
showed a young pre-Raphael ite woman, long-limbed and
slender with a narrow head and refined hands and
features. My beautiful girl was not quite like her
although she had the same slenderness and boyish figure
which attracted me and something of her intellectual or
spiritual expression.

I never spoke a single word to Beatrice, yet at that
time she had the profoundest influence on me. Her
image stood before me, like a holy altar. She transformed
me into someone praying in a temple. Day after day I
avoided drinking and other nocturnal expeditions. I

87



DEMIAN


could be alone again, enjoy reading and going for walks.

My sudden conversion drew plenty of mockery down
on my head. But now I, had an object for my love, some-
one to look up to. Once again I had an ideal; life once
more was full of mystery, gaiety, mysterious twilight, and
I felt at ease again and at home even if only as the
servant and slave of an honoured image.

Once more 1 was trying with all my might to recon-
struct my 'world of light’ out of the ruins of a devastated
portion of my life; once more 1 lived for the sole aim of
getting rid of the darkness and evil within me and
regaining the world of light, on my knees before God.
This ‘world of light’ continued to be to some extent my
own creation; it was no longer an escape, a means of
crawling back to the shelter of my mother and irrespon-
sible security. It was a new service, one I myself had
discovered and desired. The sexuality which was a tor-
ment from which I was continually in flight was now
transfigured into spirituality and devotion in this holy
fire. There would be no more darkness, nothing hateful,
no more tortured nights, no excitement in front of
lascivious pictures, no eavesdropping at forbidden doors,
no lewdness. In place of all this I raised my altar with
the image of Beatrice, and in dedicating myself to her,
I was dedicating myself to the holy spirit and the gods,
sacrificing the portion of my life which I had withdrawn
from the powers of darkness to the powers of light. My
goal became purity, not pleasure; happiness was replaced
by beauty and spirituality.

This cult of Beatrice completely changed my life. The
precocious cynic of yesterday had become an acolyte and


88



BEATRICE


I set my heart on becoming a saint. Not only did I cast
off the evil life to which I had become accustomed but
I sought to transform myself utterly, to introduce purity,
nobility . and worthiness into everything; my thoughts
were fixed on this aim while I ate, drank, talked and
dressed. I began the day with cold baths which cost me
a great effort. 1 bore myself in a dignified and serious
manner, carried myself stiffly and assumed a slow, solemn
gait which must have looked comic to outsiders but to
me it was merely an act of worship.

Of all the new practices in which I sought to express
my new mood, one had become all-important. I began
to paint. It arose from the fact that the English portrait
of Beatrice which I possessed was not enough like the
girl of my heart. I wanted to try and paint her portrait
for myself. With a new feeling of joy and hope I took
into the room — I had recently acquired one of my own —
some good drawing-paper, colours and a paint brush
and prepared my palette, glass, porcelain dish and pen-
cils. The fine temper.* colours in small tubes which I had
bought delighted me. Among them was a fiery chrome
green and I can still see today how its colour flashed
at me for the first time in the little white dish.

I began carefully. Portraiture was beyond my powers:
I wanted to start with something else and so I painted
ornaments, flower pieces and small, imaginative landscape
compositions, a tree beside a chapel, a Roman bridge
with cypress trees. I often became completely immersed
in this game and was as happy as a child with his paint-
box. Finally I began on my portrait of Beatrice.

I, spoilt a number of sheets of paper and threw them

89



DEMI AN


away. The more I endeavoured to capture the features
of the girl whom I occasionally encountered in the street,
the less successful I was. Finally I gave up the attempt
and contented myself with painting a face from my imagi-
nation and ideas that arose spontaneously as I dipped my
brush in the paint. It was a dream-face that emerged and
I was not satisfied with it. Yet I persisted- with the experi-
ment, and with every new sketch approached the type
more nearly even if it was still far removed from reality.

I grew more and more accustomed to drawing lines
idly with mv pencil and colouring areas, without any
model in mind except whatever found its way on to
the paper from my subconscious and took shape in these
half-serious scrawls.

At length one day, almost without knowing, I pro-
duced a portrait which expressed something more definite
than the previous ones. It was not the face of the girl;
it had long ceased to be that but something quite differ-
ent, unreal, yet it meant just as much to me. It looked
more like a boy’s head than a girl’s; the hair was not
flaxen like my pretty girl’s but chestnut with a tinge of
red; the chin was strong and determined, the lips rosy;
the whole was rather stiff and mask-like but it was im-
pressive and hinted at a secret inner life.

I became conscious of a strange impression as I sat
before the completed picture. It resembled a kind of god-
image or sacred mask, half-male, half-female, ageless,
purposeful yet dreamy, frozen yet mysteriously alive.
This face had some message for me; it belonged to me;
it was making some demand. It was like someone, but I
could not decide whom.


90



BEATRICE


This picture haunted my thoughts for a long time and
divided up my life. I kept it hidden away in a drawer;
no one should lay hands on it and make use of it to
mock me. But as soon as I was in my own small room, I
pulled it out and communed with it. In the evening I
nailed it on to the wall, facing my bed, gazed on it until
I fell asleep, and it was the first object my eyes opened
onto in the morning.

It was precisely at that time that I began having a
great many dreams again as I had done during my child-
hood. I felt as if I had not dreamed before for years.
Now a new kind of picture appeared before me; time
after time the painted portrait arose, living, eloquent,
friendly or hostile, sometimes distorted, sometimes
beautiful, harmonious and noble.

Then one morning when I awoke from one of these
dreams, I suddenly recognized it. It looked so fantasti-
cally familiar and seemed to call out my name. It ap-
peared to know me as a mother, as if its eyes had been
fixed on me all my life.

I stared at the picture with beating heart, the close,
brown hair, the half-feminine mouth, the strong fore-
head with its strange brightness — which it had assumed
of its own accord — and I realized that my recognition,
my rediscovery and knowledge of it were becoming more
and more a reality.

I leapt out of bed, stood before the face a,.d, from close
range, looked into the wide-open, greenish, staring eyes,
the right one of which was slightly higher than the other.
All at once the right eye seemed to twitch, faintly but un-
mistakably and I was able to recognize the portrait . »


9i



DEMI AN


Why had it only just davhied on met It was Demian’s
face.

Later I often compared the face on the paper with
Demian’s features as 1 remembered them. They were
certainly, though similar, not the same. But beyond all
doubt, it was Demian.

Once one evening in early summer the sun was slant-
ing red through my window that faced westward. Inside
the room it was dusk It occurred to me to attach the
picture of Beatrice (or Demian) to the window bar and
watch the effect as the sun shone through. The outlines
of the face were blurred but the eyes, edged with pink,
the brightness of the forehead and the energetic red
mouth glowed excitingly from the surface. For a long
time I sat opposite it even after the picture had faded
out. And gradually a feeling came over me that it was
neither Beatrice nor Demian but myself. Not that the
picture was like me — I did not feel it should be — but
the face somehow expressed my life, it was my inner self,
my fate or my daimon. That was how my friend would
look if and when I ever found him again. The woman I
loved, if ever I had a lover, would look like that. It was
the pattern of my life and death; it expressed the tone
and rhythm of my fate.

During those weeks I had embarked on some reading
which made a deeper impression on me than anything I
had read before. Even in later life I have seldom been
so completely absorbed by any books, perhaps not even
excepting Nietzsche's. It was a volume of Novalis* con-

* Translators note. The novel Demian was first published under the
pseudonym Emil Sinclair, the name of a friend of the poet Novalis
whom Hesse so much admired.

9 *



BEATRICE


taining letters and sayings, many of which I did not
understand and all of which attracted and excited me in
an unaccountable fashion. One of the sayings occurred
to me at. that moment. 1 picked up my pen and wrote
it under the picture, “Fate and temperament are the
names of a concept.” Now I understood.

I frequently met the girl 1 called Beatrice but these
encounters did not move me any more; I was merely
aware of an uninterrupted harmony and a sympathetic
longing which said : you are bound up with me, not you
yourself but your image; you are part of my fate.


My longing for Max Demian overwhelmed me again.
I had had no news of him for years. I had met him on
one single occasion in the holidays. I now see that 1
made no mention of that brief meeting in my notes and
realize that it was out of shame and vanity that 1 sup-
pressed the allusion. I must fill this gap.

Thus, one day in the holidays when I was strolling
through my home town wearing my blas£, perpetually
weary pub-crawling expression, swinging my stick and
staring into the old, despised, unchanging faces of the
townsfolk, my former friend advanced towards me. A
shudder ran through me almost as soon as I set eyes on
him. My thoughts flashed back to Franz Kiomer. Could
Demian have really forgotten that business? It was so
disagreeable to feel that indebtedness to him — just for a
mere stupid childish episode, but it was a debt all the

SAttlC • • •

t.


93



DEMI AN


He appeared to be waiting to see if I would greet him
and when I did, as casually as possible, he stretched out
his hand. He gave me his old grip; firm, warm and yet
cool and virile.

He scrutinized my face and said, “You’ve grown up,
Sinclair.” He himself seemed quite unchanged, as old
and as young as ever. He joined me and we went for a
walk and exchanged idle nothings. Not a word was said
about the old days. It occurred to me that I had written
to him several times in the past without receiving a
reply. I hoped he had forgotten those stupid, stupid
letters! He made no mention of them.

At that time I had not come across Beatrice and there
was no portrait. I was still in the middle of my period
of depression. When we reached the outskirts of the
town, I invited him to come into a pub. He did so.
Boastfully I ordered a bottle of wine, handed him a glass,
clinked my glass with his and demonstrated my famili-
arity with student customs. I emptied the first glass at
one gulp.

“Do you often visit the pub?” he asked.

"Oh, yes,” I replied casually, “what else is there to do?
After all it’s the most cheerful way of spending one’s
time.”

"Do you think so? It may well be. There’s certainly a
pleasant element in it — the carouse, Bacchanalian revels!
But that is just what the majority of people who spend
a lot of time in pubs miss. It seems to me that this
pub-haunting is a very humdrum affair. A whole night
with blazing torches for a proper carousal and riot, yes!
But this continual business, one glass after another, it


94



BEATRICE


doesn’t appear to me the real thing. Can you imagine
Faust sitting at a pub table night after night?”

I drank my wine and gave him a hostile look.

“No, but everybody isn’t Faust,” I replied curtly.

He looked at me somewhat perplexed.

"Oh well, it’s not worth arguing about. Anyhow, the
life of a soaker or wastrel is, one supposes, more lively
than that of the blameless citizen. And then — I once
read it somewhere — the life of the wastrel is the best
preparation for the mystic. There are men such as Saint
Augustine who become saints. Previously he had been
a hedonist and man of the world.”

I felt mistrustful and had no wish to defer to him and
so I said in a blas6 voice, “Yes, everyone to his taste.
But I must admit frankly that it wouldn’t interest me to
turn saint or anything of that sort.”

Demian darted a shrewd glance at me from his half-
closed eyes.

"My dear Sinclair,” he drawled, "I wasn’t trying to
say anything to upsei you. At all events, neither of us
knows what your aim is in putting back this wine. Only
that part of you that composes your life can know. It is
good to know that we have within us one who knows
everything about us, wills everything, does everything
better than we can ourselves. But you must excuse me,
I must be off home.”

We exchanged a brief goodbye. I sat down disgruntled,
drank up the contents of my bottle and discovered when
I rose to go that Demian had already paid, which
annoyed me still further.

My. thoughts returned once more to that slight inci-

95



DEMI AN


dent. I could not forget him; And the words he had said
in that tavern in the suburbs came back to my mind,
strangely fresh and significant. "It is good to know that
we have within us one who knows everything about us t ”
I glanced at the picture which hung in the window
and had now almost faded out. But I could see that the
eyes were still glowing. It was Demian’s look or else it
was he who was inside me; he knew everything about me.

How I longed for Demian 1 I knew nothing about him;
he was beyond my reach. All I knew was that he was
probably studying and that he, once his schooldays were
over, had left his mother and his native town.

I made an effort to assemble all my recollections of
Max Demian up to the period of the Kromer incident.
How much of what he had once said to me still echoed
in my ears, still held a meaning for me today and touched
me closely. Even what he had said about the wastrel and
saint on our last, unhappy meeting suddenly rose clearly
before me. Was not that how it had been with me? Had
I not lived in an atmosphere of tippling and squalor,
lost and half in a daze, until with a new zest for life
there had been a complete transformation within me and
a longing for purity, a craving for saintliness?

And so I pursued these memories; it had long been
night and it was raining outside. Even through my
recollections I could hear it raining; there had been that
time under the chestnut trees where he had once ques-
tioned me about Franz Kromer and had guessed the first
secrets of my life. One thing had followed another— our
conversations on our way to school, the confirmation
classes. Finally I recalled my first meeting with Max

96



BEATRICE


Demian. What had we talked about? I could not .remem-
ber at first but I waited and remained plunged in
thought. Then that came back too. We had been stand-
ing in front of our house after he had voiced his opinions
about the Cain story. Next he had spoken about the old,
half-faded coat-of-arms on the keystone above our front
entrance. He had said that it interested him, and that
one should take a note of such things.

That night I dreamed of Demian and the coat-of-arms.
It kept changing. Demian held it in his hands; some-
times it was small and grey, sometimes large and multi-
coloured, but he explained to me that it was always the
same bird. Finally, however, he ordered me to eat the
coat-of-arms. When I had swallowed it, I realized in a
terrible panic that the heraldic bird I had swallowed was
inside me, swelling out and was beginning to devour me
from within. Full of a deadly fear, I awoke with a start.

I was wide awake; it was the middle of the night and
I could hear the rain entering into the room. I got up to
close the window and in the process stood on something
bright that lay on the floor. Next morning, I found it
was my painted sheet of paper. It lay on the wet floor
and had curled up. I spread it out to dry in a heavy book
between two sheets of blotting paper. When I looked at
it next day, it had dried but it had changed. The red
lips had faded and contracted a little. They now looked
exactly like Demian’s.

I set about painting a fresh picture — the heraldic
bird. I can no longer remember exactly what the result
was like but there was one thing, as I knew, which could
no longer be made out in the original even close to since


D


97



DEMI AN


the thing was old and had often been repainted. The
bird was standing or perched on some object — it might
have been a flower, a gasket, a nest or a tree-top. I could
not be bothered about that and I began on the part
which I could clearly visualize. At the promptings of
some vague urge I immediately started by employing
strong colours, painting the bird’s head a golden yellow
on my paper. I continued as the mood took me and
completed the whole within a few days.

It now represented a bird of prey with a narrow and
cruel sparrow-hawk head. Half its body was sunk in a
dark, terrestrial globe and from this it was struggling to
disengage itself as from a giant egg, against a background
of blue sky. The longer I examined the sheet, the more
it was borne in upon me that it was the coloured coat-of-
arms as it had appeared in my dream.

It would have been impossible for me to write Jto
Demian even if I had known where to address the letter.
But I resolved to send him the picture of the sparrow-
hawk with the same dreamy clairvoyance with which I
did everything — irrespective of whether it would ever
reach him. I did not write anything on it — not even my
name, trimmed the edges carefully, bought a large enve*
lope and wrote my friend’s old address on it and des-
patched it.

An examination time was approaching and I had to
do more school work than usual. The masters had re-
instated me in favour since my sudden convener, horn
my previous, despicable mode of Hie. Not that I was
now by any means a model pupil, but neither I nor

anyone else could have imagined that only six. months.

/

98



BEATRICE


before everybody had considered my expulsioh in dis-
grace extremely likely.

My father now wrote to me in his old vein, free from
reproach and threat. Yet I felt no impulse to explain to
him or to anyone else how the transformation had been
effected in me. It was chance that this conversion coinci-
ded with my parents’ and teachers’ wishes. But it did
not bring me any closer to the others or indeed to any-
one; it merely increased my loneliness. For my reforma-
tion had only the vaguest target, Demian, in the far-
distant future. 1 did not even know myself; I was too
much involved. Beatrice had been the starting-point,
but for some time I had been living with my painted
pictures and my thoughts of Demian in a world so
unreal that it was completely lost both to my sight and
mind. I could never have brought myself to breathe a
Mfprd to anyone else about my dreams, my aspirations
and my inner transformation even if I had wanted to.

But how could I have wanted to?


99



V


The Bird Struggles
Out of the Egg


My painted dream-bird was on its way in search of my
friend. In what seemed a miraculous fashion a reply had
reached me.

I was in the classroom during the break between two
lessons and on my desk I found a piece of paper tucked
in my book. It was folded in the customary way we had
for the notes we wrote each other during class. My sole
surprise was as to who could be’sending me a note 4>f
that kind, for I was not on that sort of relationship with
any of my school-fellows. I thought it would turn out to
be an invitation to take part in some school rag in which
I would refuse to be involved, and I placed the paper, un-
read in front of my book. It was not until the lesson had
started that the note found its way back into my hand.

I fidgeted with the paper, unfolded it casually and saw
that it contained a few words. I glanced at them; a
phrase pulled me up short; I panicked and read on, my
heart contracted in cold fear before my fate. "The bird
is struggling out of the egg,” it read. “The egg is the
world. Whoever wants to be born must first destroy a
world. The bird is flying to God. The name of the God
is called Abraxas.”


too



THE BIRD STRUGGLES OUT OF THE EGG


After reading over these lines several times, I sank into
a deep reverie. There was no room for any doubt; it was
Demian’s reply. No one except he and I knew about the
bird. My picture had reached him. He had understood
and was endeavouring to enlighten me. But what
was the connection? And — this was what troubled
me most — what was this Abraxas? I had never heard
or read the word. “The name of the God is called
Abraxas.”

The lesson passed by without my taking in a word of
it. The next began, the last in the afternoon. It was
taken by a young assistant master who had just come
down from the university. We liked him because he .was
so young and did not assume any false dignity when,
dealing with us.

We were doing Herodotus under this Dr. Follen’s
guidance. This reading period was one of the few items
in the curriculum that interested me. But on this occa-
sion I was far away. I had opened my book mechanically
in front of me but was not following the translation.
I was deeply immersed in my own thoughts. Furthermore
I had on several occasions tested the correctness of
Demian’s remark made to me during a scripture lesson
in the old days If you wanted something strongly
enough, you achieved it.

Thus when I was very preoccupied with my own
thoughts during a lesson, I could be quite quiet and the
master would leave me undisturbed. True, if you were"
inattentive or sleepy you would suddenly find him stand-
ing by you — that had happened to me already. But if
you were really thinking, really absorbed, you were pro-


101



DEMI AN

tected. I had also experimented withWlie staring-out
technique and had found it effective. In Demian’s time
I had not pulled it oil but now I realized that one could
bring about a great deal just by thinking and intensive
staring.

So I was sitting now miles away from Herodotus and
school when the master’s voice made a sudden impact
on my consciousness like a thunderbolt, and I woke up
in a panic. I could hear his voice; he stood close to me;
I thought he had already called out my name. ^ But he
did not look at me. I breathed again.

Then I heard his voice again. I heard it saying loudly
the word “Abraxas.”

In the course of an explanation, the beginning of
which had escaped me. Dr. Follen continued, “We must
not imagine the views of those sects and mystical societies
of antiquity to be as ingenuous as they at first sight
appear from a rational consideration. Science as we
know it was absolutely unknown to antiquity. They
compensated for this by their preoccupation with philo-
sophical and mystical truths which were very highly
developed. From this arose a kind of black magic that
often led to error and crime. But this magic had also
noble antecedents and was based on a certain profundity
of thought. The teaching of Abraxas, for example, which
I cited to you a moment ago. This name was mentioned
in connection with magic Greek formulas and it was
often considered to be the name of some evil spirit of
the kind that some uncivilized tribes still believe ui
today. It appears, however, tb*t aLi axas has a much
deeper significance. We can therefore think of the name


10*



THE BIRD STRUGGLES OUT OF THE EGG

as one of a godhead who symbolizes the reconciliation of
the godly and the satanic.”

The lejarned little man spoke with eagerness and intel-
ligence but no one was very attentive and as the name
did not recur in the text my attention wandered off to
my own affairs.

"Reconcile the godly and the satanic.” The words
provoked an echo inside me. I remembered the connec-
tion. The idea had been mentioned to me by Demian
in die course of a conversation with him during the last
days of our friendship. On that occasion Demian had
said that we had indeed a god whom we honoured but
he represented only one half of the world purposely
separated, that is to say the official, authorised 'world of
light.’ But we ought to be able to honour the whole
world and so we must have either one god who was also
devil" or side by side with the cult of God we should
institute a cult of the Devil. So we had Abraxas the god
who was both God and Devil.

For a time I eagerly pursued this clue without, how-
ever, getting any further. I unsuccessfully ransacked a
whole library for references to Abraxas but I could never
be more than half-hearted in this kind of direct, con-
scious research in which one can only find truths that
are so much dead weight.

The form of Beatrice which had so earnestly pre-
occupied me for some time was gradually being sub:
merged or was slowly drifting away from me, moving
further and further away towards the horizon, becoming
palett more shadowy and remote. It»no longer satisfied
my irifjfer being.


103



D £ M I A N


A new, image now began to take shape in the strange,
withdrawn existence which I was leading like a sleep-
walker The longing $or life began to blossom out in me,
the longing for love deepened and the sex urge which I
had been able to sublimate for a time in my adoration
of Beatrice now demanded a new set of images and new
objectives. But these wishes remained unfulfilled, and it
became more impossible than ever for me to modify this
longing and expect anvthing from the girls among whom
my friends sought their happiness. I dreamed vividly
again and more in fact in day time than at night. Fancies
and images or desires rose up before me and drew me
away from the exterior world so that I had more sub-
stantial and active dealings with those fancies, dreams
and shadows, and dwelt among them more than in the
world of reality around me.

One definite dream or fantasy which kept recurring
struck me as particularly significant. This dream, the
most important and enduring of mv life, followed this
pattern : I was on my way to my parents’ home and over
the main entrance the heraldic bird gleamed gold on
an azure ground. My mother walked towards me but
when I entered and she was about to kiss me, it was no
longer she but a form I had never set eyes on, tall and
strong with a look of Max Demian and my painted
portrait — yet it was somehow different and despite the
robust frame, very feminine. The form drew me to itself
and enveloped me in a deep, shuddering embrace. My
feelings were a mixture of ecstasy and horror, the em-
brace was at once an act of worship and a crime. The
form that embraced me had something about it of both


104



THE BIRD STRUGGLES OUT OF THE EGG

my mother and my friend Demian and also this embrace
violated every sense of religious awe, yet it was bliss.
Sometimes I awoke out of this dream with a feeling of
ecstasy, sometimes in mortal fear and with a tortured
conscience as if I had committed some terrible sin.

Only gradually and unconsciously was a link being
forged between this wholly inner image and the 'sign'
that came to me from outside concerning the god I had
to search for. The link then grew closer and more inti-
mate, and I began to feel that in this dream of longing
I was invoking Abraxas himself. Ecstasy and horror, a
mixture of male and female, an intertwining of the sacred
and profane, flashes of profound guilt in the most tender
innocence — such was the nature of my love-fantasy, such
was Abraxas. Love had ceased to be the dark animal
urge I had first experienced with misgiving nor was it
the piously spiritualized cult I had brought to the image
of Beatrice. It was both and a good deal more besides;
it was the image of angels and the Devil, man and
woman, human being and beast, highest good and the
worst evil. It seemed that I was ordained to live in this
fashion, that this was my fate. My craving for it was not
untinged with fear but there was no escape; it hovered
ova* me continually.

Next spring I was to leave school and proceed with
more ’advanced studies but I was still undecided as to
where and what I was to study. A faint down had ap-,
peared on my upper lip. I was a grown man and yet;
completely helpless and without purpose. Only o/ie
thing persisted, the inner voice, the dream-image. I J^elt
it was. my duty to follow blindly wherever this vision


105



DEM I AN


might lead me. Bat it was not easy and every day I
rejected it afresh.

Perhaps, as I often thought, I was mad; perhaps merely
different from other men. But I too could do what others
~did; with a little effort and industry I could read Plato,
solve problems of trigonometry or understand chemical
analyses. There was only one thing I could not do — wrest
from myself the darkly hidden goal and obtain some sort
of picture — as others did who knew exactly that they
wanted to become teachers, judges, doctors or artists — of
how long the process would take and what hopes such a
future could hold out. But this 1 could not do. Perhaps
it would be possible one day, but could I feel assured of
that? Perhaps I should have to seek continually for
years and then become nothing; 1 would attain some
goal but it would be an evil, dangerous and fearful one.

All I wanted was to try and realize whatever was in
me. Why was that so difficult?

I made frequent attempts to paint the forceful dream-
apparition but always without success. If I had been
successful I would have sent the picture to Demian.
Where was he? I did not know. I only knew that our
fates were bound up together. When would I see him
again?

The pleasant tranquillity of the weeks and months of
the Beatrice period had long receded. At that time 11 ! had
thought I had reached an island and found peace at last.
But it was always like that — practically no situation
seemed agreeable. I was no sooner cheered by a dream
thin it immediately faded. It was no use moaning for it!
I now had within me a furnace of unsatisfied cravings,

106



THE BIRD STRUGGLES OUT OF THJE EGG


a tense expectancy which often made me completely wild
and mad. I often saw the dream apparition before me,
miraculously dear, clearer than my own hand, spoke
with it, wept before it, cursed it. I called it mother and
knelt before it in tears; 1 called it devil and whore,
vampire and murderer. It enticed me into the gentlest
dreams of love and barren shamelessness; nothing was
too good and precious, nothing too wicked or vile.

I passed the whole of that winter in a state of inner
turbulence which I find difficult to describe. I had been
long accustomed to loneliness; it did not oppress me for
I was living with Demian, with the sparrow-hawk, with
the image of the great dream-form which was both my
fate and my beloved. And it provided for all the needs
of my life since everything was directed towards greatness
and space — it all pointed towards Abraxas. Yet none of
these dream pictures came at my bidding; I could not
summon any of them, I could not, at will, give any one
of them its colours. It was they who took me; I was
governed and lived by them.

I was well armed against the outside world. I had no
fear of men; I had learned that lesson from my school-
fellows who treated me with a secret respect which often
brought a smile to my lips. When I so desired I could
see very clearly through most of them and astonish them
on occasion. But seldom if ever did I wish to do so. I
was solely and exclusively preoccupied with my inner
self. I wanted to live for a while longer in order to give'
something of myself to the world, to grapple and jdo
battlc > with it. Many a time when I went through the
streets- in the evening and my restlessness prevented me

107



DEMIAN


from returning home before midnight, I felt convinced
that my ‘beloved’ wa\ bound to meet me, pass me at the
next corner, call to me from the nearest window. Often
it all seemed unendurable and I resolved to put an end
to my life.

Just then I found a strange refuge — by chance as they
say — though I believe there is no such thing. When a
person urgently needs something and finds what he
requires, it is not chance that gives him it, it is himself,
his own craving and urgency that bring it to him.

On two or three occasions then during my walks
through the town I had heard an organ in a small church
in the suburbs without stopping to listen. The next time
I was passing I heard it again and recognized that it was
Bach. I approached the church door which I found to be
locked and as the street was almost deserted, I sat down
by the church on a curbstone, turned up my coat-collar
and listened. It was a small but good organ and it was
being marvellously played with a peculiar and extremely
individual expressiveness of will and determination
which gave the impression of a prayer. The player, I
thought, knows that a treasure is hidden in this music;
he wooes it, knocks at the door, wrestles for this treasure
as he would for his life. My knowledge of music is very
limited technically but from childhood onwards I have
had an intuitive grasp of such music of the soul and
experienced it as something inevitable.

The organist played something more modern after-
wards; it might have been by Max Reger. The church
was completely dark; only a very thin gleam of light
penetrated the nearest window. I waited until the music

108



THE BIRD STRUGGLES OUT OF THE EGG


had stopped and strolled up and down until I saw the
organist emerge. He was still quite young but older than
I was, sjiort and squat, and he moved off quickly with
energetic yet somehow reluctant strides.

-On many occasions after that I sat by the church or
walked up and down outside at the evening hour and
once found the door open and sat for half an hour in a
pew, frozen yet contented while the organist above my
head played in the dim gaslight. It was not the music
he was playing that I heard but himself; there seemed
to be a relationship and secret connection between all
the things he played. Everything was devotional, con-
secrated and devout but not devout after the manner of
churchgoers and pastors are; but devout like the pilgrims
and mendicants in the Middle Ages; devout with that
careless surrender to a feeling of universality which trans-
cends all knowledge. The organist gave renderings of the
masters who preceded Bach and of old Italian masters.
They all said the same thing, they all expressed what
the musician had in his soul — longing, inner under-
standing of the world and at the same time the wildest
separation from it, a burning hearkening to the deep
places of the soul, intoxication of religious devotion and
deep curiosity about the miraculous.

Once when I followed the organist unobserved on his
way out of the church, I saw him enter a small tavern
at the outskirts of the town. I could not resist the urge
to go in ajter him. Now, for the first time, I had a clear
view of him. He was sitting at the host’s table in a
corner of the parlour, a black felt hat on his head, a
glass of wine in front of him, and his face was just what

109



DEM IAN


I had anticipated. It was ugly and somewhat wild
looking, interrogative an^ erratic, wayward and obsti-
nate yet the mouth had 'something soft and childish
about it. All the masculinity and strength was in the
eyes and brow; the lower half of his face was tender and
immature, indecisive and to some extent feminine; the
chin, irresolute, boylike, contradicted the forehead and
expression. What I liked were the dark brown eyes full
of pride and hostility.

I sat down opposite to him without a word; there
was nobody else in the inn. He flashed a glance at me
as if he wanted to get rid of me. But I held it and stared
back unmoved until he shouted in a peevish tone, "Why
are you looking at me so devilishly hard? Do you want
something out of me?’*

"No, I don’t want anything from you,’’ I replied, "but
I have already had a good deal.’’

He knitted his brows.

"So you’re a music enthusiast? I think it’s revolting to
be mad about music.’’

But I refused to be intimidated.

"I have often listened to you in the church over there,"
I said. "But I won’t importune you further. I thought I
should perhaps discover something about you, something
special, I don’t really know what. But perhaps you would
rather not listen to me! I can always listen to you in
church."

"But I always lock it."

"Just recently you forgot to, and I sat inside. Other-
wise I stand outside or sit on the curb.”

"Oh I Another time you may come in, it’s warmer.


no



TftE, JBIRD STRUGGLES OUT OT T.HE EGG

All you've got to do is to knock at the door. But bang
hard and not while I’m playing. But fire ahead— what
do you want to tell me? You’re a young fellow, probably
a schoolboy br university student. Are you a musician?”

"No. I like listening but only to the kind of music
you play, pure music, the music that makes you feel that
someone is shaking heaven and hell. I am fond of music
I think because it is so amoral. Everything else is moral
and I am after something that isn’t. I have always found
moralizing intolerable. I don’t know how to put it. Do
you realize that there must be a god who is both God
and Devil? There’s supposed to be one, I’ve heard about
it.”

The musician pushed his hat back on his head and
tossed his hair back, away from his lofty forehead. At
the same time he gave me a piercing glance and nodded
i&me across the table.

In a gentle, eager voice he asked, "What is the name of
the god of whom you speak?”

“Unfortunately I kno v practically nothing about him
except his name which is Abraxas.”

The musician gave a vaguely mistrustful glance round
him as though someone might be spying on us. Then he
bent over to me and whispered, “I thought as much.
Who are you?”

"I’m a pupil at the grammar school.”

"How do you know about Abraxas?”

"Just by chance.”

He struck the table so that the wine spilled out of his
glass.

"Chancel Don’t talk rubbish, young fellow I One


in



DEMIAN


doesn’t get to know about Abraxas by chance, mark my
words. I’ll tell you more about him. I know a little.”

He fell silent and pushed his chair back. When 1
looked expectantly at him, he pulled a face.

* “Not here ! Another time. Here, take some ! ”

So saying he delved into the pocket of his overcoat
which he had not removed and pulled out a handful of
roast chestnuts which he threw over to me.

I said nothing, took them and ate them and felt very
happy.

“Well,” he whispered after a while. "How do you
know about — him?”

I did not hesitate to tell him.

“I was alone and desperate at the time,” I said. “Then
a friend of my earlier days intervened who knows, I
think, a good deal about him. I had painted something,
a bird emerging from a terrestrial globe which I sent to
him. Some time later when I had really forgotten about
it, I received a slip of paper on which this was written,
‘The bird is struggling out of the egg. The egg is the
world. Whoever wants to be born must destroy a world.
The bird is flying to God. The name of the God is
called Abraxas.’ ”

He did not reply; we shelled our chestnuts and ate
them with the wine.

“What about another glass?” he asked.

“No thank you. I’m not keen on drinking.”

He gave a slightly disappointed laugh.

“As you will! It’s quite the reverse with me. I’ll stay
here, but you go along now ! ”

The next time I went with him after the organ music,


1 is



THE BIRD STRUGGLES OUT OF THE EGG

he was not very communicative. He led me down an old
lane and up the stairs of a stately old house into a large,
somewhat gloomy and neglected room where apart from
the piano there was nothing to suggest music; on jthe
other hand a large bookcase and writing desk gave the
room a studious look.

“What a quantity of books you have,” I remarked as
I took them in.

“Part of them come from my father’s library; I live
with him — Yes, I reside with my father and mother but
I cannot introduce you to them because my acquain-
tances are not greatly respected in this house. I am a
Prodigal Son, you know. My father is terribly repectable,
an important pastor and preacher in this town. And, for
your information, 1 must tell you that I am his talented
and promising son who has gone astray and to some
extent even mad. I was a theology student and left that
honourable faculty shortly before the State Examination.
Though I still retain my interest in the subject as far as
my private studies an. concerned. What sort of gods
people devised for themselves in the old days I still
consider an important and fascinating study. Further-
more I am a musician now and I am shortly to obtain
some insignificant appointment as an organist, so it
seems. Then I shall be back in the church again.”

I glanced along the spines of the books, noticed Greek,
Latin and Hebrew titles as far as the feeble light from
the small table-lamp permitted. Meantime my acquain-
tance had lain down on the floor in the darkness and
appeared to be preparing for something.

“Come,” he called out after a time, “we will now



DEMEAN

practise a little philosophy. That means holding 'our
tongues, lying on our bellies and thinking."

He struck a match and, set light to the paper and
wood in the fireplace in front of which he was scrawling.
The flames leapt high; he poked and fed them with
exaggerated care. I la^ next to him on the threadbare
carpet. He stared into the fire which attracted me too
and we lay on our bellies a good hour in front of the
flickering log fire, watching the flames dart about, sink,
curve and flicker and finally die down in quiet sunken
glow in the hearth.

“Fire-worship was by no means the most stupid inven-
tion,” he muttered once to himself. Apart from this,
neither of us said a word. I stared hard into the fire, sank
into a tranquil reverie, saw shapes in the smoke and
pictures in the ashes. Once I started up. My companion
was throwing a piece of rosin into the red-hot embers;
a small, slender flame shot up and I saw in it the bird
with the yellow sparrow hawk’s head. In the dying
embers threads of gold wove nets, letters of the alphabet
and pictures appeared, hints of faces, animals, plant-
forms, worms and snakes. When I awoke from my reverie
and looked at my friend he was gazing with fanatical
concentration into the ashes, his chin resting on his fists.

“I must go now,” I murmured.

“Go then, goodbye ! ”

He did not rise to his feet and as the lamp was out, I
had to grope my way out of the cursed old house through
dark rooms and corridors. I stopped in the street and
looked up at the old house. There was no light burning
in any one of the windows. A small brass plate on the


114



THE BIRD STRUGGLES OUT OF THE EGG

front-door gleamed in the light from the gas-lamp. On it
I read the words, “Pistorius, rector."

Not undl I got home and was sitting alone in- my little
room after Supper did it occur to me that I had heard
nothing either about Abraxas or Pistorius and that we
had scarcely exchanged half a dozen words. But I was
very satisfied with my visit. And for our next meeting
he had promised to play me an exquisite piece of ancient
organ music, a passacaglia by Buxtehude.


Without realizing it, the organist, Pistorius, had given
me my first lesson when 1 had lain beside him in front
of the fire on the floor of his hermit’s room. Staring into
the fire had done me good; it had strengthened and con-
firmed certain predispositions which I had always pos-
sessed but never cultivated. Gradually I was beginning
to understand them.

Even as a child I had had at intervals a fondness for
observing strange forms in nature, not so much exam-
ining them as surrendering myself to their magic, their
oblique message. Lojng tree-roots, coloured veins in rock,
patches of oil floating on water, flaws in glass — all
such things had a certain fascination for me, above
all, water and fire, smoke, clouds, dust and especially
the swirling specks of colour which swam before
my closed eyes. In the days following my first visit to
Pistorius, I began to call all this to mind. For I noticed
that I owed a new strength and gaiety, an intensifi-
cation of feeling— of which I only became aware later
— exclusively to this prolonged staring into the fir A e.


"5



DEMI AN


I found it remarkably comforting and rewarding.

To the few experiences which I had so far discovered
on the road to my goal was now added this new one.
The consideration of such images as I have mentioned,
the surrender to odd, irrational forms in nature produces
in us a sense of the harmony of our inner being with the
will which has been responsible for these shapes. Soon
we become aware of the temptation to think of them as
being our own moods, our own creations; we see the
boundaries between ourselves and nature quiver and
dissolve and we become acquainted with the state of
mind when we are unable to decide whether the linea-
ments of our body result from impressions received from
outside or from within us. In no other practice is it so
simple to discover how creative we are and to what
extent our souls participate in the continuous creation of
the world. To an even greater extent it is this same
indivisible divinity which is active in us and in nature
so that if the outer world were destroyed each one of us
would be capable of building it up again. For mountain
and stream, tree and leaf, root and blossom, every form
in nature is echoed in us and originates in the soul whose
being is eternity and is hidden from us but none the less
gives itself to us for the most part in the power of love
and creation.

' It was not until many years later that I found this
view recorded in a book by Leonardo da Vinci who on
one occasion describes how good and deeply moving it
is to look at a wall which many people have spat upon.
Confronted with each stain on the wet wall, he must have
felt the same as Pistorius and I did in front of the fire.

1 16



THE BIRD STRUGGLES OUT OF THE EGG

At our next meeting the organist offered an explana-
tion. “We always set too narrow limits on our personali-
ties. We count as ours merely what we experience
differently as individuals or recognize as being divergent.
Yet we consist of the whole existence of the world, each
one of ,us, and just as our body bears in it the various
stages of our evolution back to the fish and further back
still, we have in our soul everything that has ever existed
in the human mind. All the gods and devils whether
among the Greeks, Chinese or Zulus are all within us,
existing as possibilities, wishes, outlets. If the human
race dwindled to one single, half-developed child that
had received no education, this child would rediscover
the entire course of evolution, would be able to produce
gods, devils, paradise, commandments and interdictions,
the whole of the Old and New Testament, everything.”

“It’s all very well,” I interpolated, “but what then is
the value of the individual? Why do we still struggle on
if everything is already complete within us?”

“Stop!” cried Pistorius pcrcmptorilv. “There is a great
deal of difference between bearing the world within you
and being conscious of that piece of knowledge. A mad-
man can produce thoughts that are an echo of Plato and
a' pious young schoolboy in a theological college ponders
on profound mythological connections which occur in
the Gnostics or Zoroaster. But he knows nothing of it I
While he remains ignorant he is a tree or a stone, at
best an animal. Once however he has the first glimmering
of this knowledge he becomes a man. You do not think
of all the bipeds who walk along the street as human
beings merely because they walk upright and carry th,eir


117



DEMI AN


young nine months 1 You can see how many of them are
fish or sheep, worms or angels, how many are ants, how
many are beesl Human potentialities are present in each
one of them but only when he realizes them and learns
to make them to some extent a conscious part of him,
can the individual be said to possess them."

Such was the general tenor of our conversations to-
gether. Rarely did they teach me anything completely
new or bring me any overwhelming surprises. They all,
however, even the most banal, struck a gentle but con-
tinuous hammer-blow on the same spot inside me; they
helped to shape me, to peel off my layers of skin, break,
the egg-shells, and as I emerged from each stage I raised
my head a little higher with a greater feeling of freedom
until my yellow bird pushed his handsome predatory
head out of the shattered shell of the terrestrial globe.

We frequently recounted our dreams to each other
.and Pistorius was able to provide an interpretation. I
even recall one remarkable example. I had a dream in
which I was able to fly yet only in such a manner that I
was somehow flung into the air, and yet had no mastery
over- it. The sensation of this flight was exhilarating but
it soon turned into fear when I saw myself, powerless,
flung to a considerable height. I then made the com-
forting discovery that I could regulate my rise and fall
by holding or releasing my breath.

Pistorius explained it to me; "The impetus which
enables you to fly is our great human possession. Every-
body has it. It is the feeling of the connection one has
with every source of power. But it is frightening I It is'
devilishly dangerous 1 That is why the majority of people

118



THE BIRD STRUGGLES OUT OF THE EGG

are so willing to renounce any idea of flying and prefer
to stroll quietly along the pavement and obey the law.
But you are not one of these. You have higher aspirations
as behoves a man of spirit. And look! You discover the
miracle that you are gradually winning the mastery and
that to. the great common power which sweeps you up*
ward is added a fine, subtle power, a machine, a means
of steering a course. And it’s wonderful. Without it you
would drift about in the air, powerless. That is what
madmen do. They have deeper presentiments than the
people on the pavement but they have no key and no
helm to steer with and they whirl round in the abyss.
But you, Sinclair, you do things ! And how is that? You
don’t really know, do you? You do it with a new organ,
a breath-controller. That shows you how impersonal
your soul is down in its depths. It is unaware of this
regulator 1 But it isn’t new. It is a loan. It has existed for
thousands of years. It is the fishes’ sense of equilibrium,
the air-bladder. And in point of fact there are a few
strange and primeval genera of fish in which the air-
bladder is a kind of lung and can function on occasion
in that capacity. It closely resembles the lung you use
for flying in your dreams I ”

He brought along a volume of zoology for me to study
and showed me the names and illustrations of these
ancient fish. And with a peculiar shudder I felt conscious
of a function that existed in me from earlier stages of
evolution.


n 9



VI


Jacob and The Angel


It is impossible to recount briefly what I learned from
the eccentric musician about Abraxas. The most impor-
tant thing was that it meant a step forward in the
progress to self-knowledge. I was at that time an unusual
youth. for my eighteen years, precocious in a hundred
ways, immature and helpless in a hundred others. When,
on occasion, I compared myself with other people, I
sometimes felt proud and conceited but often I was
depressed and mortified. I had often regarded myself as
a genius but no less often as half-mad. I could not
successfuly join in the life and pleasures of my fellows
and I had frequently been consumed with self-reproach
and anxiety, as if, separated from them, I was beyond
hope, as if I was debarred from life.

Pistorius who himself was a grown-up eccentric taught
me how to maintin my courage and self-respect. By con-
tinually finding some value in my words, dreams and
fancies, and always taking and discussing them seriously,
he set me an example.

"You told me that you love music because it has
nothing to do with morality,” he said. "That’s my view
too but you should beware of turning into a moralist!
You shouldn’t make comparisons between yourself and
other people, if nature created you a bat you must not


120




JACOB AND THE ANGEL

try and make yourself into an ostrich. You often look
upon yourself as a special case; you propose to follow
different ways from the majority. That you must unlearn.
Look into the fire, gaze into the clouds and as soon
as the presentiments come to you and the voices within
you begin to speak, surrender to them, do not merely
ask whether what you are doing suits your teacher or
your father or this or that good god! That’s the way
to self-destruction. That would be the pedestrian way,
becoming a fossil. Our god, my dear Sinclair, is called
Abraxas and he is both god and devil; he contains in
himself the world of light and the world of darkness.
Abraxas has nothing to object to in any of vour thoughts
or any of your dreams. Always remember that. But once
you become faultless and normal he abandons you in
favour of a new vessel into which he can pour his
thoughts.”

Among all my dreams the dark dream of love was the
most constant. I was always dreaming that I was entering
our old house under the heraldic bird; I advanced to
embrace my mother but she would turn out to be the
large, half-male, h If-maternal woman who filled me
with awe and for whom I felt the most violent attrac-
tion. I could never bring myself to recount this dream
to my friend. I withheld it when I had revealed every-
thing else to him. It was my private corner, my secret,
my escape.

When I was depressed, I asked Pistorius to play me
old Buxtehude’s Passacaglia. In the dark church in the
evening I would sit lost in this strange, self-contained
music, music which existed for itself and in its own


121



DEMIAN


right. It did me good to hear it and made me more
ready to heed my own inner voice.

Sometimes we stayed. for' a time sitting in thfe church
after he had finished playing the organ and watched the
daylight shining feebly and losing itself in the high
gothic windows.

"It seems qomic to think that I was once a theological
student and nearly went into the church/* said Pistorius.
"But I was only committing an error in form at that
time. It is my aim and vocation to be a priest. I was
satisfied too early in life, however, and put myself at
Jehovy/s disposal before I knew Abraxas. Every religion
has its own beauty. Religion is soul; it’s all one whether
you take part in Christian communion or make a pilgri-
mage to Mecca.”

"You could have become a pastor, then,” I said.

"No, Sinclair. I could not have been true to myself.
Our religion is worn out; as if it had ceased to be a
religion and had become a purely intellectual matter.
I could possibly become a Roman Catholic but a Protes-
tant priest, never ! The few true believers — I know some
— stick closely to the literal interpretation. I could not
say to them that Christ is not a person as far as I am
concerned but a hero, a myth, a vast shadow picture in
which humanity sees itself projected on the walls of
eternity. And the others who attend church to hear a
Well-turned sermon, to fulfil a duty so as to leave no
stone unturned and so forth — what would I have to say
to them? Convert them, do you think? But I have no
desire to do that. The priest does not want to convert,
all he wants is to live among believers, among his own



JACOB A‘ND THE ANGEL

' brethren and be an instrument and expression of the
feeling out of which man makes his gods.*’

He paused and then continued, “Our new/ belief for
which we choose the name Abraxas is a good one, my
dear friend. It is the best we have but it is still not yet
weaned! It hasn't yet grown its wings. Unfortunately a
solitary religion is Still not the true one. It must first
be enjoyed in common, must have a cult, its ecstasy, its
feast and its mysteries . . .”

He was lost in thought.

“Can’t one also experience mysteries alone or in a
very limited circle?” I asked hesitantly.

“One can indeed,” he nodded his assent. "I have long
been doing so. I have practised cults for which I should
have to spend years in prison if it was known. But I
know it is still not yet the right one.”

Suddenly he clapped me on the shoulder and I shrank
back. “Young man,” he said earnestly, "you have your
own mysteries. I know you must have dreams which you
hide from me ... I do not want to know them but I do
say this — live them, these dreams of yours; act them
out, erect altars t» them! It will still not be the entire
solution but it is a way. Time alone will show whether
you and I and a handful of others will renew the world.
But we must renew ourselves every day; otherwise it will
be hopeless. Think about it! You are eighteen years
old; you don’t chase after women of the streets; you
must have dreams and wishes of love. Perhaps they are
of the kind that frighten you. Don’t bt afraid! They
are the best you have. Believe me, I have lost a great
deal by doing violence to my dreams of love when I yras


1*3



DEMI AN


your age. You shouldn’t. When you know about Abraxas
you cannot persist in that attitude. One should be fear-
less and consider nothing forbidden that our soul craves
for.”

Shocked, I interposed, “But you can’t do everything
that comes into your head. You can’t do away with a
person because he is hostile to you.”

He stepped closer to me.

“In certain circumstances even that I In most cases,
however, it is merely an error. Nor do I mean that you
should simply do whatever goes through your mind.
No. But you should not spoil those ideas which have
their good aspect by rejecting them and moralizing
about them. Instead of nailing yourself or someone else
to the cross, you can drink from a chalice in solemn
modd and reflect on the mystery of sacrifice. Even with-
out all this, it is possible to treat one’s actions and
so-called temptations with love and respect. Then they
will reveal their meaning — and they all have a meaning.
If something that seems quite mad or sinful enters your
head in the future, should you feel like murdering some
one or committing some enormity, remember for a
moment that it is Abraxas at work in your imagination 1
The person you wish to murder is never Mr. So and So.
He is only a disguise. When we hate someone we are
hating something that is within ourselves, in his image.
We are never stirred up by something which does not
already exist within us.”

Pistorius had never said anything which had a deeper
effect upon me. I could not reply. What had moved me
most and in the strangest way was the similarity of this


124



JACOB AND THE ANGEL

exhortation to Demian’s words, which I had been carry*
ing round with me for years. They knew nothing of
each other and yet both had given me the same message.

"The things we see,” said Pistorius gently, “are the
things which are already in us. There is no reality
beyond what we have inside us. That is why most people
live such unreal lives; they take pictures outside them*
selves for the real ones and fail to express their own
world. One can of course live contentedly enough in
that situation. But once you know about the other you
no longer have the choice of following the majority
way. The way of the majority, Sinclair, is easy, ours is
hard . . . But now we must go.”

Some days later after twice waiting for him in vain
he came swaying along round a street-corner in the cold
night wind; he was reeling along, quite drunk. I felt
no wish to call after him. He went past me with shining,
bewildered eyes as if he was answering some dark call
from the unknown. I followed him along a street. He
moved as if he was being drawn along by an invisible
thread. His gait was fantastic, yet somehow free, as if he
were a ghost. I retu* .ied home gloomily to my unsolved
dreams.

"So that’s how the world is renewed ! ” I thought and
felt at the same instant that such a reflection was un-
worthy and sententious. After all, what did I know
about his dreams? Perhaps the path he trod in his
drunkenness was surer than the tentative one I trod.


Sometimes in the breaks between the lessons a fellow



DEMI AN


pupil to whom I had never paid any previous attention
seemed anxious to talk to me. He was a small, delicate,
puny individual with lank red hair and he had some-
thing odd about his mien and deportment. One even-
ing when I went hoiyie he watched out for me in^the
lane to allow me to pass by; then he pursued me and
posted himself in front of our door.

"Do you want something from me?" I asked.

"Only to speak to you?” he ventured, shyly. "Would
you mind walking a few yards with me?"

I followed him and sensed that he was very excited
and full of expectancy. His hands trembled.

"Are you a spiritualist?” he asked quite suddenly.

"No, Knauer,” I laughed. "Not a bit. What makes
you think so?”

"But you’re a theosophist?”

"Not that either.”

"Oh, don’t be so secretive. I am quite sure that there’s
something special about you. I can read it in your eyes.
1 am quite convinced that you are in communication
’with the spirit world. I am not asking out of curiosity,
Sinclair, I am just a seeker and am so alone.”

"Let’s hear about it,” I encouraged him. "I know
absolutely nothing about spirits; I live in my own
dreams; that’s what you have felt about me. Others live
in dreams but not in their own — that’s the difference.”

"Yes, perhaps that’s it,” he murmured. “It’s just a
question of what kind of dreams you live in. Hgve you
ever heard of white magic?”

I could not claim to have done so.

"It’s white magic when you learn to regulate your

is6



JACOB AND THE ANGEL

own life. Then you can become immortal and. do magic
too. Haven't you ever indulged in experiments' of that
kind?”

At ''first he was reluctant to answer my inquisitive
questions about these practices until I turned to move
away; then he unburdened himself about the whole
thing,

‘Tor example, I myself practise that kind of magic
when I want to go to sleep or concentrate. I just think
of something, a word or a name for instance or a geo 1
metric figure. I think about it as hard as I can and try
to think it inside my brain until I feel that it has
become part of it. Then I think it into my neck and so
on until .the idea has taken complete possession of me.
Then I am so to speak ‘set’ and nothing else can rouse
me from my peace of mind.”

1 had a vague idea of what he meant but 1 realized
that he had something else on his mind for he was
curiously excited and restless. I tried to be tactful with
my questions and before long he asked his own.

“Are you still continent?” he asked me nervously.

“In what sense? Do you mean sexually?”

“Yes. I have been continent now for two years — since
I learned by experience. Before that I was depraved, but
you know that . . . Haven’t you ever had a woman
then?”

“No,” I said. “I haven’t found the right one.”

“But if you did find one you considered the right one,
would you go to bed with her?”

"Yes, of course. If she herself had nothing against it,”
I said with faint irony.


1*7



DEMIAN


“Oh, then you are on the wrong road I You can only
develop your inner resources if you stay completely con-
tinent. That’s what I have done now for two whole
years; two years and a little more than a month! It is
so difficult! Very often I can’t hold out any longer.”

“Listen to me, Knauer. I don’t believe continency is
all that important.”

"I know that’s what they all say,” he objected. "But I
didn’t expect that from you. Whoever wants to follow
the spiritual path must keep absolutely pure.”

"All right, do so! But I fail to understand why the
person who represses his sexual desires should be con-
sidered any ‘purer’ than anyone else. Or can you exclude
the sexual clement from every thought and dream?”

He gave me a look of despair.

“No, indeed no! Heavens, and yet it seems inevitable.
I have dreams at night that I could not even tell myself 1
Fearful dreams!”

I recalled what Pistorius had told me. But however
much I felt his words to be true, I was unable to pass
‘them on. I found it impossible to proffer him any advice
which did not emanate from my own personal experi-
ence unless I felt able to follow it myself. I was silent
and felt humiliated that someone should ask advice of
me when I had none to give.

"I have tried everything!” moaned Knauer. "I have
done everything that can be done with cold water, snow,
exercise and running but it’s no use. I wake up every
night from dreams which I have no right to dream. And
the dreadful thing is that I gradually lose grip of the
spiritual progress I have already made. I find it almost


128



JACOB AND THE ANGEL

impossible to concentrate or lull mysel£ to sleep again;
I often lie awake the whole night. I can never hold out
long. When I finally have to give up the struggle,
yield and make myself impure again I am more despic-
able than all the others who haven’t ever had to fight.
Can you ' understand that?”

I nodded but did not know what to say. He was
beginning to bore me and I was afraid of myself because
I could not feel very deeply impressed by his despair.
All I felt was ‘I can’t help you.’

"Then you can’t tell me anything to help?” he said
finally, sad and exhausted. “Absolutely nothing? But
there must be a way? How do you manage?”

"I can’t say, Knauer. We can’t help anybody else. No
one was able to help me. You must rely on yourself and
then do what comes to you from within. There’s no
other way. If you can’t find the way to yourself you
won’t find any spirits either, I am sure.”

Disappointed and suddenly bereft of speech the little
chap looked at me. Then a sudden gleam of hatred
entered his eye and he grimaced and shrieked, “You’re
a fine saint 1 You’ve g^t your secret vice tool You play
the wise man and secretly you cling to the same dirt as
I do and everybody else! You’re a swine like me. We’re
all of us swine!”

I went off and left him standing there. He took two
or three steps after me, hesitated, turned round and ran
off. I felt ill, with mixed feelings of disgust and sympathy
and I was unable to rid myself of this nausea until I
had arranged my few pictures round me in my little
room and given myself up to my private dreams with

E i*9



intense fervour. Then my dream returned at once — our
gateway and the coat-of-arms, my mother and the strange
woman whose features I saw with such a preternatural
clarity that I was able to draw her portrait from memory
the same evening . .

When this drawing was completed a few days later
and had been painted in almost unconsciously during
the odd ten minu.tes in betweentimes, I hung it on my
wall the same evening, pushed the study lamp in front
of it and stood before it as before a spirit with whom I
had to fight it out. The face was similar to the previous
one, similar to my friend Demian and in some ways
resembled me. One eye was perceptibly higher than the
other and her glance looked over and beyond me with
a fateful stare.

I stood before her and the nervous strain made my
blood run cold. I questioned the picture, accused it,
caressed it, prayed to it, called it mother, sweetheart,
whore and strumpet, I called it Abraxas. Meantime
sayings of Pistorius — or were they Demian’s — came into
my head; I could not recall when they had been uttered
but I imagined I could hear them again. They were
remarks about Jacob wrestling with the angel of God
and his 'I will not let thee go except thou bless me.’

The painted face in the lamp-light changed at every
utterance I made — light and shining, dark and sinister,
livid lids closed over glazed eyes which opened again
and darted loving glances — it was woman, man, girl,
small child, animal, then it melted away to a small
speck, grew large and clear again. At length I yielded to
the strong impulse to shut my eyes and now saw the



JACOB AND THE ANGEL

image within myself, more vivid and powerful than ever.
I wanted to prostrate myself before it but it was so much
part of me that I was unable to leave it — as if it had
just turned into me myself.

Then I heard a dark, thunderous roar as though from
a spring ‘storm and I trembled in an indescribably novel
feeling of fear and misadventure. Stars flashed before my
eyes and were extinguished. Memories which went back
to forgotten infancy, nay pre-existence, and the first
stages of being, hurried past me. But the memories
which seemed to rehearse my whole life in its deepest
intimacy did not stop with the past and present, they
went further, mirrored the future, tore me away from
the present into new forms of life whose images were
fantastically clear and dazzling though I was unable to
recapture a single one later.

In the night I awoke out of my profound sleep. I was
still dressed and lay diagonally across the bed. I switched
on the light, felt I must remember something important
but could recall nothing of the hours that had passed.
I lit the lamp. The memory gradually returned. I looked
for the picture; it n longer hung on the wall, it was
not on the table either. Then I had a vague feeling that
I had burned it. Or had I merely dreamed that I had
burnt it in my hands and eaten the ashes?

A great restlessness seized hold of me; I put on my hat;
strode out through the house and along the lane as if I
were being driven by some outward force; ran on and
on through streets and across squares as though blown
by gusts of wind; listened by the dark church of my
friend, blindly seeking for something without knowing



DEM I AN


what it was. I passed through a suburb where there were
brothels that had a light here and there in the windows.
Farther out still stood some new buildings and piles of
bricks partially covered with grey coloured snow. As I
wandered like a somnambulist under the influence of this
strange impulse I noticed the new building of my home
town; it was there that my tormentor Kromer had taken
me for our first financial settlement. A similar building
lay before me in the grey night, yawned at me with its
gaping door. It drew me in; I had no choice and I
advanced, stumbling over heaps of sand and rubbish;
the urge was irresistible; I had to enter. I staggered
into the dreary room over planks and broken bricks; it
smelt depressingly of damp cold and stones. There was a
heap of sand, a light stain of grey — all the rest was dark.

Then a voice cried out in terror, “For God’s sake,
Sinclair, where have you come from?”

And a figure rose out of the darkness, a small, lean
fellow like a ghost. My hair stood on end, I recognized
my schoolmate Knauer.

“How do you come to be here?” he asked, almost mad
with emotion. “How did you manage to find me?”

I did not understand what he meant.

“I wasn’t searching for you,” I said, dazed, and every
word I said cost me an effort and was forced wearily
through my heavy, as it were frozen, lips.

He stared at me.

"Not searching?”

“No. I felt drawn here. Did you call me? You must
have called me. What are you doing here then? It’s
night.”


13*



JACOB AND THE ANGEL

He clasped me tightly in his thin arms.

“Yes, night. It will soon be morning. Oh, Sinclair, how
wonderful that you haven’t forgotten mel Can you for-
give me then?”

“What for?”

“Oh dear, I was so odious!”

Only at this point did I recall our conversation. Had
it occurred four or five days ago? It seemed a lifetime
since then. But now suddenly it all became clear. Not
only what had happened between us but why I had
come hither and what Knauer had wanted to do out
there.

"You intended to take your life, then, Knauer?”

He shivered with cold and fear.

“Yes. I intended to. I don’t know whether I could
have done. I intended to wait until it was morning.”

I drew him out into the open air. The first horizontal
streaks of dawn glimmered unbelievably cold and joyless
in the grey air.

I led the boy for a while by the arm. I heard myself
say, “Now go home and don’t say a word to anyone!
You’ve been treading the wrong path, the false path!
We are not the swine you spoke of. We are human
beings. We make gods and do battle with them and
they bless us.”

We walked on in silence and parted company. When
I reached home it was daylight.


The best things I gained from my remaining days in
St. were the hours I spent listening to Pistorius at


*33



DEMI AN


the organ or in front of the fire. We were studying a
Greek text together about Abraxas and he read out
extracts from a translation from the Vedas and taught
me how to speak the sacred 'Om/ But it was not these
bits of occult learning that provided my inner susten-
ance; rather the contrary. What encouraged me was the
progress within myself, my increasing faith in my own
dreams, thoughts and presentiments and my increasing
knowledge of the power I possessed within me.

I had a complete understanding with Pistorius. I only
needed to think hard of him and could be sure that he —
or a message from him — would come. I could ask him
anything, as I would Demian, without his having to
be present in person; all I had to do was to imagine him
there and frame my questions in the form of intensive
thoughts. Then all the spiritual effort that I had ex-
pended in the question came back to me with like force.
Only, it was not the person of Pistorius, nor that of
Demian that I conjured-up but the painted picture, the
half male, half female fantasy of my daimon which I
had to evoke. This being was now no longer confined
to my dreams, no longer merely depicted on paper; it
was in me like a wish-fulfilment and enhanced version
of myself. The relationship which the would-be suicide,
Knauer, had now established with me was peculiar,
sometimes laughable. Ever since the night during which
I had been ‘sent to him* he clung to me like a faithful
servant or dog, made every effort to link his life with
mine and followed me round blindly. He came to me
with the most astonishing questions and requests, wanted
to see spirits, learn the cabbala and refused to believe

>34



JACOB AND THE ANGEL

me when I assured him that I did not understand all
these mysteries. He thought nothing was beyond my
powers. But the strange thing was that he often ap-
proached me with his wonderful and stupid questions
just at a moment when I was faced with some problem
to which his moody ideas or requests often provided the
clue and set me on the road towards a solution. He was
often a bore and I would dismiss him peremptorily but
I still had the feeling that he too was sent to me, that
from him too came back whatever 1 gave him — in
double measure, he too was a leader for me or at any
rate represented a way to follow. The mad books and
writings which he brought to me and in which he sought
his salvation taught me more than I could comprehend
at the time.

Later on Knauer slipped unnoticed out of my life. A
formal parting was not necessary. It was just the oppo-
site with Pistorius. Towards the conclusion of my school-
days in St. I still had a strange experience to share

with him.

Even the most harmless o r human beings cannot alto-
gether escape coming into conflict with the praiseworthy
virtues of piety and gratitude on one or two occasions
in their lives. Sooner or later everyone must take the
step that separates him from his father and teachers;
everyone must experience something of .the hardness of
solitude even if most human beings cannot take much
of it and soon crawl back. I myself did not make a
sudden or violent break from my parents and their
world, my childhood 'world of light/ but I slowly,
almost imperceptibly, drew further and further away


>35



DEMIAN


from them. I was sorry and suffered many galling hours
during my visits home but 1 was not fundamentally
affected; it was bearable.

But where we have given of our love and respect not
from habit but of our owri free will, where we have
been children and friends from our inmost heart, it is
a bitter and .terrible moment when we suddenly recog-
nize that our natural tendency is bound to lead us
away from the people we love. Then every thought
which alienates the friend and teacher turns back into
our own heart with poisoned barbs; then every defen-
sive blow comes back at one’s own face, then the words
’infidelity’ and ‘ingratitude’ surge up like shameful cries
and branding irons in the mind of the person who has
previously prided himself on his sound moral behaviour,
and the frightened heart flees timidly back to the
charmed valleys of childish virtues; unable .to believe
that this break too must be made, this bond also be
severed.

As time went on my unquestioning acknowledgment
of my friend Pistorius as a leader had been modified. My
friendship with him, his counsel, his proximity, the
comfort he had brought, had been the most vital experi-
ences of those months of my adolescence. God had
spoken to me through him. From his lips my dreams had
been returned to me, explained and interpreted. He
had restored my faith in myself. And now, alas, 1 was
becoming conscious of a gradually increasing opposition
to him within me. I found too much didacticism in his
words; I felt that he only fully understood one part of
me.


136



JACOB AND THE ANGEL

No quarrel or scene occurred between us, no break,
not even an agreement to differ. I merely uttered one
single, harmless phrase — but it was in that precise
moment that an illusion was shattered and fell between
us like so many coloured fragments.

A vague presentiment of such a happening had already
depressed me for some time and it took a definite shape
one Sunday in his old study. We were lying on the floor
by the fire and he was talking about the mysteries and
forms of religion which he was studying and turning
over in his mind and the future potentialities of which
preoccupied him. All this seemed to me more an object
of curiosity and interest than a really vital matter; it
had a pedagogic ring about it; it sounded like tedious
research among fragments of ancient worlds. And all at
once I felt a repugnance against the whole business, this
cult of mythologies, this mosaic game he was playing
with fragments of traditional religious beliefs.

“Pistorius,” I said suddenly in a fit of malice which
both surprised and frightened me. “You ought to tell
me a dream — a real dream — one that you have dreamed
during the night. What you are telling me is all so
damned antiquarian 1”

He had never heard me speak like that before and I
immediately realized with a mixture of shame and horror
that the arrow which I had fired at him and with which
I had pierced his heart, had come from his own armoury
— and that I was now returning to him with sharpened
barbs the self-reproaches which I had sometimes heard
him utter in his ironical way.

He reacted instantaneously and fell silent at once. I


137



DEMIAN


glanced at him with dread in my heart and sawthat he
had gone terribly pale.

* After a long, uneasy pause, he threw some fresh logs
on the fire and said in a t^uiet voice, "You are quite
right, Sinclair. You’re a clever fellow and I will spare
you the ‘antiquarian’ stuff.” Although he spoke calmly
he was obviously hurt. What had I done?

I was very near tears; I wanted to speak a message of
encouragement, implore his forgiveness, assure him of
my affection, my deep gratitude. Words of comfort rose
to my lips but I could not utter them. 1 continued to
lie there, gazing into the fire and kept silent. He kept
silent too and so we lay and the fire dwindled and with
every dying flame 1 felt something beautiful and pro-
found that could never return glow and disappear.

"I am afraid you misunderstand me,” I said at length
dejectedly in a dry, hoarse voice. These stupid and sense-
less words fell mechanically from my lips as if I was
reading from a magazine serial.

"I understand you perfectly well,” said Pistorius
gently. “You are right.” He paused. Then he continued
slowly, "that is as far as one man can be right against
anyone else.”

A voice inside me said, ‘No, no, I am wrong,’ but I
could not say it aloud. I knew that with my brief words
I had put my finger on his fundamental weakness,
his affliction and wound. 1 had probed the place where
he was unsure of himself. His ideal was ‘antiquarian’ —
he was a seeker in the past, a romantic. And suddenly I
realized very forcibly that what Pistorius had been and
had given to me was precisely what he could never be

138



JACOB AND THE ANGEL

and gije to himself. He had shown me a way which
even he, the leader, must by-pass and abandon.

God knows how the words had sprung to my lips! I
had not intended them in any derogatory sense, had
not anticipated their disastrous effect. I had said some-
thing of whose significance I myself was not aware at
the moment of speaking; I had yielded to a vague, some-
what petty and mischievous impulse and it had been
charged with fate. I had committed a trivial and heedless
gaucherie which he regarded as a judgment on him.

How much I wished at that time that he would fly
into a temper; defend himself and storm about me. But
he did nothing of the kind. I had to do all that for him
inside myself. He would have forced a smile if he could
have managed i.t. The fact that he found it impossible
was the surest proof of the extent of the injury I had
done him.

Meantime, by accepting this blow so quietly from an
impudent and ungrateful pupil, by remaining silent and
taking the rebuff, by acknowledging what I had said as
his fate, he made me odioi< in my own eyes and my
indiscretion a hundred times worse. When I had hit
out 1 thought I was aiming my blow at a tough, well-
armed man but now it turned out to be a quiet, suffer-
ing defenceless creature who was surrendering without
a protest.

We stayed for a long time in front of the glimmering
fire, and every flowing shape, every writhing twig evoked
the rich and pleasurable hours of the past and brought
home more and more my indebtedness to Pistorius.
Finally I could bear it no longer. I rose to my feet and

»39



DEMI AN


went. For long enough I stood at his door; for long
enough I stood on the dark stairs, for long enough
outside, waiting by the door in case he should follow
me. Then I continued my Way and tramped along for
hours and hours through the town and suburbs, park
and woods until evening. Then, for the first time, I was
conscious of the mark of Cain on my forehead. It was
only gradually that I became aware of this. My thoughts
were all aimed in one direction — accusing myself and
defending Pistorius. Yet it ended the other way round,
for although I was prepared to regret and take back my
hasty word I felt that what I had said was true. Now for
the first time I understood Pistorius and was able to re-
construct in my mind the whole dream that he had set
himself to fulfil. He had wanted to be a priest, to
announce the new religion, provide new forms for the
movement, serve it with love and devotion and create a
series of new symbols. But it was beyond his power to
do so; this could never be his function. He lingered
too much in the past, his knowledge of ancient days was
too precise; he knew far too much about Egypt, India,
Mithras and Abraxas. His love was bound up with sym-
bols that the world had already seen and in his heart of
hearts he realized that the New must be really new and
different and must spring up from new soil and not be
created from museums and libraries. Perhaps his func-
tion was to help to lead men to themselves — as he had
done in my case — not to provide them with the yet
unspoken message and their new gods.

And at this point I felt the truth burning within me
like a sharp flame, that there was some r 61 e for every-


140



JACOB AND THE ANGEL

body but it was not one which he himself could choose,
re-cast and regulate to his own liking. One had no right
to want new gods, no right at all to want to give the
world anything of that sortl There was but one duty
for a grown man; it was to seek the way to himself, to
become resolute within, .to grope his way forward wher-
ever that might lead him. The discovery shook me pro-
foundly; it was the fruit of this experience. I had often
toyed with pictures of the future, dreamed of r 61 es which
might be assigned to me — as a poet, maybe, or prophet
or painter or kindred vocation. All that was futile. I was
not there to write poetry, to preach or paint; neither I
nor any other man was there for .that purpose. They
were only incidental things. There was only one true
vocation for everybody — to find the way to himself. He
might end as poet, lunatic, prophet or criminal — that
was not his affair; ultimately it was of no account. His
affair was to discover his own destiny, not something of
his own choosing, and live it out wholly and resolutely
within himself. Anything else was merely a half life, an
attempt at evasion, an es< *pe into the ideals of the
masses, complacency and fear of his inner soul. The new
picture rose before me, sacred and awe-inspiring, a hun-
dred times glimpsed, possibly often expressed and now
experienced for the first time. I was an experiment on
the part of nature, a ‘throw’ into the unknown, perhaps
for some new purpose, perhaps for nothing and mv only
vocation was to allow this ‘throw’ to work itself out in
my innermost being, feel its will within me and make it
wholly mine. That or nothing!

I had already tasted much loneliness. Now I felt .that


141



DEMI AN


there was a deeper loneliness, a loneliness that was in-
escapable.

I made no attempt at a reconciliation with Pistorius.
We remained friends but the Relationship had changed.
On one occasion only did we refer to the conversation.
He said “You know that I wished to become a priest.
Above all I wanted to be the priest of the new religion
of which you and I have so many presentiments. That
r 61 e can never be mine. I know it and I have known it
for a long time without wholly admitting it to myself.
I now intend to undertake another kind of priestly
service — perhaps on the organ, perhaps some other way.
But I must always have things around me that I find
beautiful and sacred — organ music and mystery, symbol
and myth. I need those and cannot renounce them.
That is my weakness. For often enough, Sinclair, I
know that I ought not to have desires of this kind, that
they are luxury and weakness. It would be larger-
minded and juster if I put myself quite unreservedly
at the disposal of fate. But that I cannot do; it is the
only thing I cannot do. But perhaps you can. It is diffi-
cult; it is the only really difficult thing there'is. I have
often dreamed of doing so; but I cannot; I am afraid.
I am 'not capable of standing so naked and alone; I am
a poor weak dog who needs warmth and food and likes
the comfort of having his fellow creatures near him.
The man who really wants nothing beyond his destiny
no longer has his neighbours beside him; he stands quite
alone and has nothing but the cold world around him.
Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane. There have been
martyrs who let themselves be nailed to the cross with-


14s



JACOB AND THE ANGEL

out & murmur, but even these were not heroes, were not
'freed’ for even they wanted something that was homefy
and familiar to them — they had models, they had ideals.
But the man who follows his destiny is allowed neither
models nor ideals; nothing cherished or comforting!
And yet this is the path one must follow. People like
you and me are truly lonely but we still have each
other; we have the secret satisfaction of being different,
of putting up resistance, of desiring the unusual. But
one must cast aside that too if one wishes to go the
whole way. One may not be revolutionary, an example
or a martyr either. It is beyond imagining.”

Yes, it was beyond imagining, but it could be dreamed
of, anticipated, felt. Sometimes I had a slight experience
of it when I found a whole quiet hour to myself. At such
times I would look into myself and see the image of my
destiny in the staring eyes. They could be full of wisdom,
full of madness; they could glow with love or dire evil
— it was all the same. You could not choose, you ought
not to want anything; only yourself, your own fate.
Pistorius had served me :• a guide on part of my
journey. •

In those days I ran around like a blind man. Storms
raged inside me; every step was danger. I saw nothing
in front of me except the abysmal darkness into which
all former paths ended and vanished. And within myself
I saw the image of the leader who resembled Demian
and in whose eyes my fate could be read.

I wrote on a piece of paper: “A leader has abandoned
me. I am standing in utter darkness. I cannot take
another step alone. Help me 1 ”


>43



DEMI AN


I wanted to send a message to Demian. Yet I forbore;
each time the impulse came, it seemed so feeble and
senseless. But I knew my little prayer by heart and
often uttered it silently. It accompanied me every hour.
I began to have some inkling of what prayer meant.


My schooldays were over. I was to make a holiday tour
which my father had planned. Then I was to proceed
to the university, but I did not know what subject I
was expected to read. I was allowed to do philosophy
for a term. Any other subject would have done as well.


144



VII


Eva


One time during the holidays I visited the house where
years before, Demian had lived with his mother. An old
woman was strolling in the garden, I spoke to her and
learned that the house belonged to her. I inquired after
the Demian family. She remembered them very well, but
she did not know where they lived at present. Sensing
my interest in them, she took me into the house, looked
out a leather album and showed me a photograph of
Demian’s mother. I could hardly remember her but now
that I had the small photograph before me my heart
stood still. It was the picture of my dreams. There she
was, the tall, almost masculine figure, looking like her
son, but with maternal traits, traits of severity and deep
passion, beautiful and al'.ring, beautiful and unap-
proachable, daimon and mother, fate and lover. There
was no mistaking her!

The discovery that my dream image existed on this
earth affected me like some fantastic miracle I So there
was a woman who looked like that, who bore the features
of my destiny I Where was she? Where? And she was
Demian’s mother!

Shortly after this I embarked on my journey. A strange
journey 1 I travelled restlessly from place to place,
following every impulse, always searching for this


145



DEMIAN


woman. There were days when everyone I met reminded
me of her, echoed her, resembled her, enticed me along
the alleys in strange cities, railway stations, trains, like
a confused dream. There were other days when I saw
how futile my search was. Then I would sit idly some-
where in a park, a hotel garden, a waiting-room, look
into myself and endeavour to bring life back to the
image within me. Bu.t it had now become shy and evan-
escent. I was unable to sleep. I had to be satisfied with
cat-naps on railway journeys through unknown land-
scapes. Once a woman in Zurich followed me. She was
a pretty, somewhat impudent creature. I hardly looked
at her, but continued on my way as if she were made of
air. I would have rather died then and there than pay
attention to any other woman even for an hour.

I felt that my fate was drawing me on. I felt that the
moment of fulfilment was approaching and I was mad
with impatience at not being able to do anything about
it. Once in a station — I think it was Innsbruck — I caught
sight of a woman who reminded me of Eva. She was
seated by the window in a train that was just starting,
and I was miserable for days. And suddenly the form
re-appeared in a dream one night; I woke up feeling
humiliated and dejected by the futility of my hunt and
made my way back home.

A few weeks later I was enrolled as a member of the

university of H . I found everything disappointing.

The course of lectures on the history of philosophy
which I attended was as uninspired and stereotyped as
the activities of the undergraduates. They were all so
much to pattern; everybody behaved in an identical

146



way and the animated gaiety on their boyish faces
looked empty and artificial. But I was free I I had the
whole day to myself, I lived in peace and comfort in a
tumble-down house just outside the town and I had a
few volumes of Nietzsche on my table. I lived with him,
felt the loneliness of his soul, shared his prescience of
the fate that drove him unceasingly on, suffered with
him and rejoiced that there had been one man who had
relentlessly followed his destiny.

Late one evening I was strolling through the .town.
An autumn wind was blowing and I could hear mem-
bers of student clubs singing in the taverns. Clouds of
tobacco smoke came from the opened windows with a
profusion of songs, loud, solemn yet uninspired and
uniformly dead.

I stood at the street corner listening as this punctually
rehearsed gaiety of youth rang out in the night from the
two inns. Community spirit everywhere, sitting about
together everywhere, everywhere escape from fate and
flight to cosy firesides !

Two men were walking slo'vly behind me. I caught a
snatch of their conversation.

“Isn’t it just like the young men's house in a negro
village? said one. “Everything’s the same down to the
tattoing which is now in fashion. Look, there you have
young Europe.”

The voice sounded amazingly familiar — I’d heard it
before. I followed the two of them along the dark lane;
one was Japanese, small and elegant; I could see his
smiling yellow face gleaming under a street-lamp.

The other was now speaking again.



DEMI AN


“I don't suppose it is any better with you in Japan.
The people who don’t make a bee-line for the fireside
are rare the whole world over. There are some here too."

I felt a mixture of joy and alarm as each word he said
went through me. I knew the speaker. It was Demian.

I followed him and the Japanese through the gusty
night, along the dark lanes, listened to their conversa-
tion and Demian’s voice was as music in my ear. It had
the familiar ring, the familiar assurance and calm and
all its old power over me. Everything was set to rights
again. I had found him.

When they arrived at the end of a street in the suburbs
the Japanese took his leave and opened the door of a
house. Demian retraced his steps; I had stood still, wait-
ing for him in the middle of the street. My heart beat
fast as I saw him coming towards me, with his springy
tread and upright carriage. He was wearing a fawn
mackintosh and a thin walking stick dangled from his
arm. He came on without any change in his uniform
pace until he had practically reached me, then he re-
moved his hat and I obtained a clearer view of the
familiar intelligent face with the determined mouth and
the peculiar radiance of his broad forehead.

“Demian!" I called out.

He stretched his hand out towards me.

"So it's you, Sinclair ! I have been expecting you.”

“Did you know I was here then?"

“Not exactly, but I certainly hoped you were. I didn’t
see you until tonight; you’ve been on our tracks the
whole time.”

"Did you recognize me straight away then?”

148



EVA


“Of course. You have changed, naturally. But you
still have the mark on you.”

“The ‘mark’? What sort of mark?”

“In the old days we called it ‘the mark of Cain’ if you
still remember. It’s our sign. You have always had it —
that’s how I became your friend. But it’s more evident
now.”

“I wasn’t aware of .that. But on second thoughts, yes, I
was. Once I painted a picture of you, Demian, and I
was astonished to find that it resembled me. Was that
the ‘mark’?”

“Yes, that was it. Good! now you’ve understood! My
mother will be pleased too.”

This frightened me.

"Your mother? Is she here? But she doesn’t know me.”

“She knows about you. She will recognize you without
my having to tell her who you are . . . You’ve kept us
without news of you for a long time.”

"I often wanted to write but I couldn’t. For some time
now I have felt in my bones that I must soon find you.
I’ve been waiting for that e*.ery day.”

He thrust his arm under mine and walked along
with me. An atmosphere of calm surrounded him which
infected me.

We were soon chatting as we used to in the old days.
Our thoughts went back to our time at school, the con-
firmation classes, also the more unfortunate period in
the holidays — only now our conversation was confined
to our earliest and closest relationship and the Franz
Kromer business was not mentioned.

Without noticing it we had got on to strange and


149



DEMI AN


mysterious topics. We talked — like an echo of Demian’s
exchanges of views with his Japanese friend— of student
life and other things that seemed a far cry from that
and yet there was a fundamental and inner unity of
idea behind everything Demian said.

He spoke of the spirit of Europe and the signs of the
times. On all sides, he said, we were seeing the reign of
codperation and the herd instinct, love and freedom
nowhere. All this communal spirit from student club
and glee-club to the same spirit in the government was
an inevitable development, it was community life based
on anxiety, fear and opportunism; within it was an out-
worn and indolent way of life approaching its collapse.

"Communal spirit,” said Demian, “is a fine thing. But
what we now see flourishing everywhere is not really
that. The real spirit will rise up, new, from the separate
contribution of each individual and for a time it will
transform the world. The only manifestation of com-
munal spirit to be seen at present is the herd-instinct at
work. Human beings fly into each others arms because
they are afraid of each other — the masters afraid for
themselves. They are a community composed entirely
for themselves! And why are they afraid? Man is only
afraid when he is not attuned to himself. They are afraid
because they have never made themselves known to
themselves There are a community composed entirely
of men who are afraid of the unknown element within
themselves! They are all conscious of the fact that the
laws of life they have inherited are no longer valid, that
they are living according to archaic tablets of the law
that neither their religion nor customs are adapted to

150



EVA —


our present-day needs. For a hundred years or so Europe
has done nothing but study and build factories I They
know exactly how many grams of explosive are needed
to kill a man but they do not know how to pray to
God, they do not even know how to remain happy and
contented for one single hour. Just look at a students’
club, like this. Or indeed any place of amusement where
rich people congregate. Hopeless! my dear Sinclair,
nothing encouraging can emerge from that kind of thing.
These men who come together in this nervous fashion
are riddled with fear and evil; none of them trust each
other. They cling to ideals which no longer exist, and
stone anyone who sets up a new one. I have a presenti-
ment that great divisions lie ahead. They will come,
believe me! and come soon! Naturally they will not
‘improve* the world. Whether the workers murder the
manufacturers or the Russians and Germans shoot each
other, it will merely be a change of ownership. But it
won’t have been in vain. It will show up the bankruptcy
of the present-day ideal; there will be a sweeping away
of stone-age gods. This wor'd as it is now constituted,
will perish, will be destroyed, it’s happening before our
eyes."

“And what will become of us in the meantime?” I
asked.

“Us? Perhaps we will be destroyed with it. But even
that does not absolve us from responsibility. Around
whatever remains of us, or around those of us who sur-
vive the catastrophe, will gather the spirit of the future.
The will of humanity which this Europe of ours with its
science and industry fairs has shouted down for a time

15 1



DEMI AN


will be revealed. It will then become clear that the will
of humanity is never and nowhere .to be identified with
that of our present communities, states and nations,
clubs and churches. No; what nature wants of man is
written in a few individuals, in you, in me. It was
written in Christ, it was written in Nietzsche. Only for
these 'important currents alone — which can of course
assume a different form every day — will there be a place
when the communities of today collapse.”

It was late when we stopped in front of a garden by
the river.

“This is where we live,” said Demian. “Come and
visit us soon! We want to see you very much.”

Full of elation I retraced my long way back through
the now chilly night air. Here and there noisy students
were reeling home through the town. I had often marked
the contrast between their comic kind of merriment and
my solitary life, sometimes with scorn, sometimes with
a feeling of deprivation. But never until today had I
realized with calm and quiet confidence how little it
mattered to me and how remote and dead all that world
now was for me. I called to mind the civil servants in
my own town, worthy old gentlemen who clung to the
memories of their drunken university days as if they
were memories of a blessed paradise, and upon the van-
ished ‘freedom’ of their student years built a cult similar
to that which poets or other ‘Romantics’ formerly de-
voted to childhood. Was it everywhere alike? It was
always somewhere in the past that they looked for ‘free-
dom’ and ‘happiness’ out of sheer dread lest they should
be reminded of their own responsibilities and their own


15 *



EVA


future course. They drank and made merry for a few
years; then they crawled into .their shells and became
serious-minded men in the service of the state. Yes, it
was indolence, the spirit of indolence among us, and
this student stupidity at least was not so stupid and evil
as countless other stupidities.

By the time I had arrived at my distant home and was
preparing for bed, all these thoughts had vanished and
the whole of my mind was focussed expectantly on the
great hope which the day had brought me. I was to be
allowed to see Demian’s mother as soon as I wished,
tomorrow! The students could hold their drunken cele-
brations, tat.too their faces, the world could be indolent
and wait for its destruction for all I cared! I was only
waiting for one thing — for my fate to approach me in a
new guise.

I slept hard until late in the morning. The new day
dawned like a solemn feast-day of the kind I had not
experienced since boyhood. I was full of great restlessness
but devoid of any sort of fear. I felt that an important
day had dawned for me, I saw and experienced a changed
world around me, expectant, meaningful and solemn,
even the gentle autumn rain had its beauty and a calm
festive air full of happy, sacred music. For the first time
the outer world was perfectly attuned to the world within
me as when it is a special day for the heart and one feels
that it is blessed to be alive. No house, no shop-window,
no face disturbed me in the street; everything was as it
should be, without any of the flat and humdrum look of
the everyday, ready and expectant to face its destiny with
reverence. It was how the world had appeared to me, a


»53



DEMI AN


small boy on the mornings of the big feast-days, Christ-
mas and Easter. I had forgotten that the world could
still be so lovely. I had grown accustomed to my inner
life, resigned to the fact that I had lost my feeling for
the outside world and that the loss of its bright colours
was an inseparable part of the loss of childhood and
that one must to some extent pay for the freedom and
maturity of the soul with the renunciation of those pure
gleams of light. But now, entranced, I saw that all this
had only been clouded over and that it was still possible
as a ‘liberated’ person and renouncer of childhood happi-
ness to see the world shine and savour the delicious thrill
of the child’s vision.

A moment came when I found my way back to the
garden on the outskirts of the town where I had taken
my leave of Max Demian that night. Hidden behind
high walls and mist-grey trees stood a little house, bright
and homely. Tall plants grew behind a high glass wall;
behind glistening windows were dark walls with pictures
and bookshelves. The front door led straight into a small
heated hall, and a silent dark-skinned old maid servant,
with a white apron, showed me in and took my coat.

She, left me alone in the hall. I looked around me and
was immediately swept into the middle of my dream,
for high up on the dark-panelled wall, above a door,
hung a familiar picture in a black frame. It was my bird
with the golden-yellow sparrow-hawk’s head, struggling
out of its terrestrial shell. Taken aback, I stood there
motionless — in my heart were mixed feelings of joy and
pain as if at that moment everything that I had done
and experienced before was coming back to me in the


154



EVA


form of a reply and a fulfilment. 1 saw a host of pictures
flashing past my mind’s eye — the house at home with
the old coat-of-arms above the door arch, the boy Demian
sketching the carving, myself as a boy, terribly involved
in the evil spell of my enemy Kromer, myself in adoles-
cence, in my schoolroom by the table quietly painting
the bird of my desire, my soul lost in the intricacy of its
own threads — and everything, everything up to the
present moment found a new echo in me, was corrobor-
ated, answered, approved.

With eyes moistened with tears I gazed at my paint-
ing, absorbed in my reflections. Then my glance
dropped. Under the picture of the bird in the opened
door stood a tall woman in a dark dress. It was she.

I was unable to utter a word. From a face that resem-
bled her son’s, timeless and ageless and full of inward
strength, the beautiful, dignified woman gave me a
friendly smile. Her gaze was fulfilment, her greeting a
homecoming.

Silently I stretched out my hands towards her. She
took them both in her warm, firm hands.

“You are Sinclair. I recognized you at once. Welcomel”

Her voice was deep and warm. I drank it up like sweet
wine. And now I looked up and into her quiet face, the
black unfathomable eyes, at her fresh, ripe lips, the open,
queenly brow that bore the ‘sign.’

“How glad I ami" I said and kissed her hands. “I
believe I have been on my way here the whole of my life
— and now I have reached home at last."

She gave a motherly smile.

“One never reaches home,” she said amiably. “But

»55



DEMI AN


wherever friendly paths intersect the whole world looks
like home for a time."

She was expressing what I had felt on my way to her.
Her voice and even her words were like her son’s yet at
the same time quite different. Everything about her was
riper, warmer, more assured. But just as Max in the old
days had never given the impression of being a boy, his
mother did not look like the mother of a grown-up son,
so young and charming was the aura that surrounded her
face and her hair, so firm and smooth her fair skin, so fresh
her lips. More regal even than in my dreams she stood
before me and this closeness was bliss, her gaze fulfilment.

This then was the new form in which my fate was to
reveal itself, no longer stern, no longer setting me apart
but fresh and cheerful ! I made no resolutions, took no
vows — I had attained my goal, the high point from
which the continuing path was revealed distant and
attractive, climbing to the Promised Land, shaded by
tree-tops of approaching happiness, cooled by near-by
gardens of every joy. Whatever might happen to me, I
was blessed in my knowledge that this woman was in
the world, that I could drink in her voice and breathe
her presence. If she could only become a mother to me,
a lover, a goddess — if she could just be here! if only my
path could be close to hers!

She pointed up to my sparrow-hawk picture.

"You never gave Max more pleasure than with this
picture,” she said reflectively. "And me too. We have
been expecting you — when the painting came we knew
that you were on your way to us. When you were a small
boy, Sinclair, my son came back home from school one

156



EVA


day and said, 'There’s a boy there who has the 'mark’ on
his forehead; I must have him for my friend.’ It was
you. You’ve not had an easy time but we had confidence
in you. You came across Max again when you were at
home on holiday. You Were about sixteen years old. Max
told me about it . . .”

I interrupted, “He told you thatl That was the most
miserable period in my life ! ”

"Yes, Max said to me, ‘Sinclair has his worst time
coming now. He is making another attempt to take
refuge among the others. He has even become a pub-
crawler; but he won’t be successful. His ‘mark’ is momen-
tarily obscured but it sears him secretly underneath.’
Isn’t that true?”

"Oh yes, exactly like that. Then I discovered Beatrice
and then at last, a guide came to me. He was called
Pistorius. Only then did it become clear why my boyhood
had been so closely bound up with Demiaii and why I
could not escape from him. Dear Eva, dear mother, I
often thought I should have to take my own life. Is the
way as difficult as this for everybody?”

She caressed my hair with her hand. It felt as light as
a breeze.

“It is always difficult to be born. You know the bird
did not find it easy to struggle out of the egg. Think
back and ask yourself, was the way so hard then? Wasn’t
it beautiful too? Could you have wished a more beauti-
ful or easier path?”

I shook my head.

"It was hard,” I said as if I were asleep, "it was hard
until the dream came.”


»57



DEM (A N

She nodded and looked right into me.

“Yes, you must find your dream, then the way becomes
easy. But no dream lasts, each dream releases a new one
and you should not wish to cling fast to any particular
one.”

I was profoundly shaken. Was that a warning note
already? Was that a defensive move already? But it was
all one; I was prepared to allow myself to be guided by
her and not inquire about the goal.

“I do not know,” I said, “how long my dream will
last. I wish it-could be eternal. My fate has received me
under the picture of the bird like a mother, and like a
lover. I belong to it and nothing else.”

"While the dream is your fate, and as long as you
remain faithful to it,” she confirmed in serious tones.

I was overcome by a sudden sadness and a longing to
die in that enchanted hour. I felt my tears — what an
infinity of time since I had last wept — well unceasingly
in my eyes and I could not restrain them. I turned
violently on my heel, walked to the window and gazed
into the distance beyond the plant-pots with tear-blinded
eyes.

I heard her voice behind me; it was calm and yet as
brimming with tenderness as a wine-filled beaker.

"Sinclair, you are a child! Your ‘fate’ loves you
indeed. One day it will be wholly yours as you dream it
will be if you remain constant to it.”

I had regained my self-control and I turned my face
towards her again. She gave me her hand.

"I have a few friends,” she said, smiling, "just a hand-
ful of very close friends who call me ‘Frau Eva.’ You

158



5 V A

shall be one of them if you wish."

She led me to the door, opened it and indicated the
garden. "You will find Max ou.t there."

I stood dazed and shaken under the tall trees; I did
not know whether I was more awake or more in a dream
than ever. The rain dripped gently from the branches.
Slowly I walked out into the garden which bordered the
river. Finally I found Demian. He was standing in an
open summer-house, stripped to the waist and was doing
some boxing practice with a suspended sandbag.

I stopped, amazed. Demian looked strikingly hand-
some with his broad chest and firm, manly head; the
raised arms with taut muscles were large and powerful,
the movements came from the hips, shoulders and arms
like gushing springs.

"Demian 1” I called. “What are you doing here?”

He gave a cheerful laugh.

"Practising. I’ve promised the little Jap a boxing
match; he’s as agile as a kitten, and just as full of tricks,
of course. But he won’t pull it off with me. It is a slight
act of abasement that I owe Mm.”

He drew on his shirt and jacket.

"You’ve just been with mother, I suppose?” he asked.

"Yes, Demian and what a wonderful mother you have !
Frau Eva I The name suits her admirably; she’s like a
universal mother.”

He looked into my face thoughtfully for a moment.

"So you know her name already? You may well be
proud, my lad. You’re the first person she’s told it to in
the first hour of meeting.”

From this day on I went in and out of their house

»59



DEMI AN


like a son and brother — and a lover too. When I closed
the door behind me, or rather as soon as I saw the tall
trees in the garden rise up, I felt rich and happy. Out-
side was ‘reality,’ outside were streets and houses, human
beings, institutions, libraries, and classrooms — but here
was love and soul, this was the home of dream and
legend. And yet we lived in no way cut off from the
outside world; we often lived in the midst of it in our
thoughts and discussions but on different ground. We
were not divided off from the majority of men by
boundaries but by another kind of vision. It was our
function to represent an island in the world, a kind of
prototype perhaps, to proclaim in our lives new poten-
tialities by our way of living. I, who had been a solitary
so long, learned about the companionship which is pos-
sible between human beings who have tasted utter and
complete loneliness. I no longer hankered after the tables
of the fortunate nor the feasts of the blessed. I was no
longer affected by envy or nostalgia when I watched
the community life of others. And slowly I was initiated
into the secret of those who bear the ‘sign’ on their brow.

We who bore the ‘sign’ might rightly be considered
odd by the world, even mad and dangerous. We were
‘awake’ or ‘wakening’ and our striving was directed at
an ever-increasing wakefulness, whereas the striving and
quest for happiness of the rest was aimed at identifying
their thoughts, ideals, duties, their lives and fortunes
more and more closely with that of the herd. That too
was striving, that too was power and greatness. But
whereas we, in our conception, represented the will of
nature to renew itself, to individualize and march for-

160



EVA


ward, the others lived in the desire for the perpetuation
of things as they are. For them humanity — which they
loved as we did — was something complete that must be
maintained and protected. For us humanity was a distant
goal towards which we were marching, whose image no
one yet know, whose laws were nowhere written down.

Apart from Frau Eva, Max and myself many seekers
of a very varied kind were closely or in a more general
way attached to our circle. Many of them followed par-
ticular paths, had chosen special aims, put their faith in
specific ideas and duties. They included astrologers, cab-
balists and a disciple of Count Tolstoy and all manner
of sensitive, shy, vulnerable men, members of new sects,
devotees of Indian practices, vegetarians and so forth.
With all these we had no common spiritual bond save
the respect which each of us accorded the secret ideal
of the other. Those who were concerned with man’s
pursuit of gods and new ideals in the past were closer
to us. Their preoccupations often reminded me of those
of Pistorius. They brought books with them, translated
texts of ancient tongues .to showed us illustrations of
ancient symbols and rites, and taught us to see how the
whole possession of humanity so far consisted of ideals
that emanated from the unconscious soul, dreams in
which humanity groped after the vague notions they
had of their future potentialities. Thus we made our
way through the wonderful, thousand-headed throng of
the gods of the ancient world up to the dawn of the
Christian conversion. We learned about the creeds of
solitary saints and the changes of religion among differ-
ent races. And from everything we collected in this way

f 161



DEMI AN


we gained a critical understanding of our time and con-
temporary Europe which with prodigious efforts had
created new weapons for mankind but had ended by
falling into a deep and final desolation of the spirit.
For it had conquered the whole world only to lose its
own soul in the process.

The circle also included believers and adherents of
particular hopes and faiths. There were Buddhists who
were eager to convert Europe, disciples of Tolstoy and
other sects. We who were more intimate together felt
no anxiety about the shape the future was to take. Every
sect, every faith seemed dead already and of no use. The
only duty and destiny we acknowledged was that each
one of us should become so completely himself, so utterly
faithful to the active seed of nature within him and live
in accordance with it that the unknown future should
find us prepared and ready for whatever it might bring
forth.

For expressed or unexpressed this was clear in our
minds, that a new birth and a collapse of the present
time was imminent and already discernible. Demian
often said to me, "What will come is beyond our powers
of imagination. The soul of Europe is an animal which
lay fettered for an infinitely long time. When it becomes
free, its first impulses will not be the most agreeable.
But the ways, straight or crooked are unimportant pro-
vided the real need of the soul — which we have so long
and continually drugged and led on false trails — finally
comes to light. Then our day will dawn; then we shall
be needed, not as leaders or new law-givers — we shall
not survive to see the new laws — but rather as men of


i6s



good will and, as such, ready to go forth and stand pre-
pared wherever fate may need us. Look how all men
are ready to accomplish the incredible once their ideals
are threatened. But there is no one there when a new,
ideal, a new and perhaps dangerous and secret stirring
of new life is knocking at the door. We shall be the
handful of people who are there ready to move forward.
That is why we are branded — as Cain was — to rouse
fear and hatred and drive men out of their unimagina-
tive idyll into more dangerous ways. All men who have
striven for the progress of humanity, all of them without
exception, were capable and effective only because they
were ready to accept their fate. It is true of Moses and
Buddha; it is true of Napoleon and Bismark. What
particular movement one serves, what pole one is directed
from are matters outside one’s own choice. If Bismarck
had understood the social democrats and had imposed
himself upon them, he would have been a shrewd fellow
but hardly a man of destiny. The same applies to
Napoleon, Caesar, Loyola, all of them in fact. They
must understand their situa^on biologically and histori-
cally. When the upheavals of the earth’s surface cast
the creatures of the sea on the land and land creatures
into the sea, the pre-destined specimens of the various
orders were there ready to follow their destiny and
accomplished the new and fantastic, and by making
new biological adjustments were able to save their
species from destruction. We do not know whether
these were the same specimens who had previously
distinguished themselves among their species as staunch,
conservative upholders of the status quo or rather as



DE MI AN


eccentrics and revolutionaries, but we do know that they
were ready and could therefore lead their species into
the new phase of evolution. Therefore we too intend
to be ready."

Frau Eva was often present during .these discussions
but she herself did not join in. She was a listener and
an echo of each one of us as we explained our thoughts,
full of confidence and understanding; it seemed as if
all our ideas emanated from her and went back to her
in the end. It was bliss for me to sit close to her, hear
her voice sometimes and share the rich and inspiring
atmosphere that surrounded her.

She was immediately aware of any unhappiness or new
development within me. I gained the impression that the
dreams I had at night were inspired by her. I often
recounted them to her and she found them compre-
hensible and natural; they held no mysteries which she
could not grasp intuitively. For a time my dreams
followed the pattern of our day-time conversations. I
dreamed that the whole world was in a turmoil and
that by myself or with Demian I was tensely waiting
for the fateful moment. The figure of destiny was veiled
but had the features of Frau Eva. To be chosen or
rejected by her ; that was fate.

Often enough she said with a smile, "Your dream is
not yet complete, Sinclair. You have forgotten the best
part,” and then that part would come back to me and
I could not understand how I had come to forget it.

At times I was restless and tortured by desire. I
thought I could no longer bear to have her near me
without taking her in my arms. She soon became aware

164



EVA


of this. When on one occasion I absented myself for
several days and then returned in a state of distress, she
took me aside and said, “You must not give way to
desires which you do not believe in. I know what you
want. You should however either be capable of renounc-
ing those desires or feel wholly justified in having them.
If you are once able to make your request in such a
way that you are certain that the fulfilment exists within
yourself, then sooner or later the fulfilment will come.
But at present you are first wishing, then regretting and
full of apprehension. All that must be overcome. Let me
tell you a story.”

And she told me about a youth who had fallen in
love with a star. He stood by the sea, stretched out his
arms and prayed to the star, dreamed of it, made it the
object of all his thoughts. But he knew, or thought he
knew, that a star could not be embraced by a mortal
being. He considered it to be his fate to love a star
without any hope of fulfilment, and on this conception
he founded a poetic philosophy of renunciation, torment
and silent suffering that would refine and cleanse him.
But all his dreams were directed to the star. Once he
stood on the high cliff at night by the sea and contem-
plated the star and burned with love for it. And in
moments of great longing he leaped into space towards
the star. But just as he leaped the thought flashed
through him, ‘this is impossible 1’ There he lay or the
shore, shattered. He had not understood how to love. If
at the moment of jumping he had possessed a sure and
steadfast faith in the fulfilment of his love he would have
soared into the air and have been united with the star . . .

G 165



OEMIAN


“Love must not entreat/' she added, “nor demand.
Love must have the power to' find its own way to cer-
tainty. Then it ceases merely to be attracted and begins
to attract. Your love, Sinclair, is attracted by me. When
it begins to attract me, I will come. I will not bestow a
gift; I must be won."

Another time she told me another story. It concerned
a lover whose love was unrequited. He withdrew into
his heart and thought his love would consume him. For
him the world seemed lost, he no longer saw the blue
heaven and the green forest; the brook no longer mur-
mured; he took no pleasure in the sound of the harp;
nothing mattered any more, and he had become poor
and wretched. But his love increased and he would have
welcomed ruin and death rather than renounce posses-
sion of this beautiful woman with whom he was in-
fatuated. Then he felt that his passion had burned up
everything else inside him, and it became so strong and
magnetic that the beautiful woman was compelled to
follow. She came and he stood with outstretched arms
ready to draw her to him. As she stood before him she
was completely transformed and he saw that he had won
back all he had previously lost. She stood before him
and surrendered herself to him and the sky, forest and
stream all moved back towards him in new and resplen-
dent colours and spoke to him in his own language. And
instead of winning a woman, he had the whole world
in his heart and every star in heaven glowed in him and
joy coursed through his being. He had loved and by so
doing, had found himself.

My love for Eva seemed to me to fill my whole life.

166



EVA


But every day she looked different. On many occasions
I believed that it was not really just her as a person,
whom I yearned for with all my being, but that she
existed as an outward symbol of my inner self and her
sole purpose was to lead me more deeply into myself.
Things she said often sounded like replies from my
unconscious mind to burning questions which tormen-
ted me. There were other moments when as I sat beside
her I was consumed with sensual desire and kissed
objects which she had touched. And little by little
sensual and transcendental love, reality and symbol
mingled together. As I thought about her in my room at
home in tranquil absorption, I felt her hand in mine
and her lips touching my lips. Or I would be conscious
of her presence, look into her face, speak with her and
hear her voice, not knowing whether she was real or a
dream. I began to realize how one can be possessed of a
lasting and immortal love. I would gain knowledge of
a new religion from my reading, and it would give me
the same feeling as a kiss from Eva. She stroked my
hair and smiled with all her warm affection, and I had
the same feeling as when I took a s.tep forward in
knowledge of my inner self. Her person embraced every-
thing that was significant and fateful for me. She could
be transformed into each one of my thoughts and each
of my thoughts could be transformed into her.

I had been apprehensive about the Christmas vac? tion
which I spent at my parents’ home because I thought it
was bound to be torture to be away from Eva for two
whole weeks. But it did not turn out like that. It was
wonderful to be at home and yet be able to think of

167



DEMIAN


her. When I arrived back at H I stayed away from

her for two days in order to savour this security and
independence from her physical presence. I had dreams
too in which my union with her was consummated in a
symbolic act. She was a star and I was a star on my way
to her, and we met and mutually attracted, remained
together and circled round each other blissfully in all
eternity to the accompaniment of the music of the
spheres.

I told her this dream on my first visit on returning.

"It is a lovely dream,” she said quietly, "Make it
true!”

There was a day in early spring that I have never
forgotten. I entered the hall; a window was open and
a sly current of air wafted the heavy scent of hyacinths
through the room. As no one was about, I went upstairs
to Max Demian’s study. I tapped lightly on the door and
as was my custom, went in without waiting for a reply.

The room was dark and all the curtains were drawn.
The doors stood open onto a small adjoining room
where Max had set up a chemical laboratory. From it
came the clear white light of the spring sun which shone
through the rain clouds. I thought that there was no
one in and drew back one of the curtains.

Then I saw Max Demian huddled on a stool by the
curtained window, looking strangely different, and it
flashed through me that I had already experienced this
moment in the past. His arms hung limp, his hands
were supported on his knees, his head was slightly bowed
over them and his eyes, though open, were unseeing
and dead; the pupils reflected a thin thread of light as


168



EVA


if they were fragments of glass. His livid face was hollow
and expressed nothing but a terrible fixity; he resembled
one of those age-old animal masks on a temple gateway.
He did not appear to be breathing.

Memory took charge I had seen him looking exactly
like that once before, many years ago, when I was a
small boy. His eyes had been turned inward in just that
way, his hands lay lifeless together, a fly had crawled
over his face. And on that occasion — it might have been
six years before — he had looked like this, old and time-
less; no line in his face today showed any change.

Overcome with fear I quietly left the room and hurried
downstairs. I met Eva in the hall. She was pale and
seemed tired in a way I had never known her to be
before, and just then a shadow passed over the window
and the white, dazzling sun suddenly vanished.

“I’ve been with Max,” I whispered gently, “has any-
thing happened? He is asleep or drugged, I don’t know
which; I saw him look like that once before.”

“You didn’t wake him up, 'Ud you?” she asked quietly.

“No; he didn’t hear me. I left the room straight away.
Tell me, Frau Eva, what is wrong with him?”

"Don’t worry, Sinclair, nothing is wrong. He has with-
drawn into himself. It will soon pass.”

She stood up and went out into the garden although
it was beginning to rain. I felt that she did not want me
to accompany her so I walked up and down the hall,
inhaled the overpowering scent of the hyacinths, stared
at my bird picture above the door and breathed the
strange atmosphere of oppressiveness which filled the
house that morning. What was it? What had happened?

169



DEMIAN


Frau Eva returned before long. Beads of rain were
suspended in her dark hair. She sat down in her arm-
chair. She seemed weary. I approached her, bent over
ho* head and kissed the raindrops out of her hair. Her
eyes were bright and calm but the drops tasted like tears.

"Shall I have a look at him?" I whispered.

She 'gave a weak smile.

"Don’t be a child, Sinclair I" she admonished as if
she was trying to break a spell in herself. "Go off now
and come back later. I can’t talk to you just now."

I hurriedly left the house and town and walked in
the direction of the mountains with the fine rain slant-
ing against me; low clouds swept by as if they were
weighed down with fear. Near the ground there was
hardly a breath of wind but a storm seemed to be blow-
ing in higher altitudes. Several times the sun, white and
dazzling, momentarily broke through rifts in the steely
clouds.

Then a more attractive yellow cloud passed over the
sky, piled itself against the other grey bank of cloud and
in a few seconds the wind fashioned a shape out of the
yellow and blue-grey mass, a gigantic bird that tore
itself free from the steel-blue chaos and flew off into the
sky with great beats of its wings.

Then a storm became audible and a mixture of hail
and rain rattled down. There was a brief, unbelievable
and terrifying crack of thunder over the rain-lashed
landscape and immediately afterwards a gleam of sun-
shine burst through, and on the nearby mountains the
pale snow shone livid and unreal above the brown forest.

When, hours later, I returned wet through and


170



EVA


buffeted by the wind, Demian himself opened the door
to me.

He took me up into his room. A gas jet was burning
in the laboratory and papers were strewn about the floor.
He had evidently been working.

“Sit down,” he invited, "you must be exhausted; it
was a ghastly storm; it must have been hard going for
you out there. There's some tea coming up.”

"There’s something odd about today.” I began hesi-
tantly. "It isn’t only this bit of a storm.”

He gave me a searching look.

"Did you see anything?”

"Yes; I saw a picture in the clouds, quite clearly for
a moment.”

"What kind of a picture?”

“A bird.”

"The sparrow-hawk? Was it? The bird of your
dreams?”

“Yes, it was my sparrow-hawk. Huge and yellow, and
it flew off into the steel-blue sky.”

Demian heaved a great sigh.

There was a knock. The old servant maid brought in
the tea.

"Help yourself, Sinclair — I don’t believe it was just
chance that you saw the bird.”

"Chance? Does one see things like that by chance?”

"Quite right. No. It means something. Do you know
what?”

“No; I only feel that it portends a world convulsion
of some kind — a move on the part of destiny. Something
I believe concerns us all.”


171



DEMI AN


He paced up and down.

“A move on the part of destiny?” he shouted, “I
dreamed the same kind of thing last night and mother
had a premonition yesterday which conveyed the same
message ... I dreamed I was climbing up a ladder
placed against a tree trunk or tower. When I had reached
the top, I saw the whole landscape ablaze — a vast plain
with its towns and villages. I can’t yet remember it all —
it is still somewhat confused.”

“Does the dream have any personal message for you?”
I asked.

“Of course! No one dreams anything that doesn’t
concern himself. But it doesn’t only concern me; you’re
quite right. I am pretty accurate in separating the
dreams which affect my own soul from the others, rare
in all conscience — in which the whole destiny of the
human race is involved. I have rarely had such dreams
and never before one of which I could say that it was a
prophecy which was fulfilled. The interpretations are
too uncertain. But I know for sure that I’ve dreamed
something that doesn’t concern me alone. The dream is
linked up with other, previous dreams I’ve had and
which it continues. It was those dreams which caused
me the forebodings I spoke to you about before. That
our world is desperately indolent, we know, but that
would be insufficent reason .to prophesy its destruction.
But for several years I have dreamed dreams which make
me feel that the collapse of an old world is imminent.
At first these were vague, remote presentiments but they
have become increasingly strong and unambiguous. 1
still know nothing more except that something is going

17s



EVA


to happen on a vast scale, something terrible in which I
personally shall be involved. Sinclair, we shall survive
whatever this thing is that we have discussed so often.
The world will be renewed. There’s a smell of death in
the air. Nothing new arises without death. But it is more
terrible than I supposed.” I stared at him aghast.

“Can’t you tell me the rest of your dream?” I ventured
to ask him.

He shook his head.

“No.”

The door opened and Frau Eva entered.

“So you’re sitting here together! You’re not feeling
sad, children, I hope?”

She looked fresh, all trace of tiredness had vanished.
Demian smiled at her and she came up to us like a
mother approaching her frightened children.

“Not sad, mother. We have merely been trying to solve
the enigma of these new omens. But it doesn’t matter.
Whatever is to happen will happen suddenly; it will
suddenly be there and then we shall learn whatever we
need to know.”

But I felt depressed, and when I took my leave and
walked alone across the hall, the scent of the hyacinths
seemed faded, insipid and corpse-like. A shadow had
fallen over us.


*73



VIII


The Beginning of The End


I had managed to see through the summer term in H — .
We spent nearly all our time in the garden by the
river instead of in the house. The Japanese student, who
incidentally had been well and truly defeated in the
boxing match, had departed, the disciple of Tolstoy had
gone too. Dcmian kept a horse and went for long rides
day after day. I was frequently alone with his mother.

Sometimes I was surprised to find myself living in such
a state of contentment. I had so long been accustomed
to being alone, to living a life of denial, to dragging my

burdens round with me, that these months in H

seemed like an island of dreams on which I was being
allowed to lead a comfortable and enchanted life among
beautiful and agreeable things. I felt a presentiment that
it was the foretaste of that new, higher companionship
which had been the subject of our speculations. Now
and again I was overwhelmed with a profound regret
concerning this happiness, for I knew very well that it
could not last. It was not my lot to breathe freely in
fullness and comfort, I needed the spur of torment. I felt
that one day I would awaken out of these wonderful
dream-fantasies and stand quite alone again, in the cold
world of other people where there was nothing but soli-
tude or struggle for me.


*74




THE BEGINNING Of THE END

From now on I stayed close .to Frau Eva with feelings
of redoubled affection, glad that my 'fate’ still bore those
calm, handsome features.

The summer flashed by easily enough; term was
already nearly over and it would soon be time for
farewells. I dared not think of it; nor did I, but clung
to the happy days like a butterfly to the honey-flower. It
had been my Golden Age, the first fulfilment of my life
and my acceptance into a charmed circle — what was to
follow? I would have to struggle through again, suffer
the old longings, have dreams and live alone.

One day this foreboding came over me with such force
that my love for Eva flared up suddenly and caused me
great pain. My God, what a short time I had left; soon
I should no longer be seeing her, no longer hearing
her good, assured step about the house, no longer find-
ing her flowers on my table! And what had I achieved?
I had luxuriated in dreams and comfort instead of win-
ning her, instead of struggling for her and clasping her
to me for ever! Everything she had told me about true
love came back to me, a I mdred stirring, admonitory
messages, and as many gentle promises and words of
encouragement, too, perhaps; and what had I made out
of it all? Nothing.

I stood in the middle of the room, summoned my
whole conscious being and thought of Eva. I wanted to
gather all the power of my soul in order to make her
aware of my love and attract her to me. She must come;
she must long for my embrace, my kisses must tremble
on her ripe lips.

I stood and concentrated every effort until I grew cold

175



DEMIAN


from my fingers and feet inwards. I felt the strength
ebbing out of me. For a few moments something inside
me seemed to contract — something bright and cold; for
a second it was as though I had a crystal of glass in my
heart, and I knew that it was myself. The chill crept up
to my chest.

When I woke up from this terrible tenseness, I felt
that something was happening. I was mortally tired but
ready to see Eva come into my room, glowing and
ecstatic.

The trample of horses’ hooves could now be heard
down the street, the metallic sound drew near, then
suddenly stopped. I leaped to the window, and saw
Demian dismounting below. I ran down.

“What’s happened, Demian? Nothing wrong with your
mother, I hope?”

He did not hear my words. He was very pale, and the
perspiration was running down his cheeks from both
sides of his forehead. He tied the bridle of his sweating
horse to the garden fence, gripped my arm and walked
down the street with me.

“Do you know what?”

I did not know anything.

Demian squeezed my arm and turned his face towards
me with a strange, sombre look of sympathy.

"Yes, young ’un; it’s started now. You knew about
the strained relations between ourselves and Russia . .”

“What? Is it war? I’ve never believed it possible.”

He spoke in a whisper although nobody was anywhere
near.

"It hasn’t yet been declared but it is war, you may be

176



THE BEGINNING OF THE END


sure of that. I didn’t worry you about it before, but since
then I’ve come across new signs on three occasions. It’s
not going to be the end of the world, an earthquake or
revolution, but war. You will see the effect on people.
They will acclaim it wi.th enthusiasm; everybody is
already looking forward to the first onslaught — so dull
have their lives become. But you will see, Sinclair; this
is only the beginning. Perhaps it will be a great war, a
very great war. The new world is beginning and the
new world will be terrible for those who cling to the
old. What will you do?”

I was dumbfounded, so strange and impossible did it
sound.

“I don’t know — and what about you?”

He shrugged his shoulders.

"An immediate mobilization has been ordered. I’ve
been recalled. I’m a lieutenant.”

"You! I hadn’t any idea.”

"Yes; it was one of the things on which I compro-
mised. You know how I ha f <* to attract attention and
have always erred on the siae of being over-correct. I
believe I shall be at the Front within a week.”

“For God’s sake . . .”

"Now, young ’un, you mustn’t get sentimental about
it. It won’t give me any pleasure to order men to fire at
living targets, but that will be merely incidental. Each
one of us will be caught up now in .the great wheel.
You too. You’ll certainly be called up.”

"And what about your mother, Demian?”

Now, for the first time my thoughts turned back to
what had been taking place a quarter of an hour before.


177



DEMIAN


How the world had changed! I had been summoning
all my strength to conjure up the rarest image and now
(ate was suddenly standing staring at me (rom a grimly
threatening mask.

“My mother? Oh, we don’t need to have any anxiety
about her. She’s safe, safer than anyone else in the world.
Do you love her as much as all that?’*

“You knew it then, Demian?”

He laughed a cheerful, unconstrained laugh.

“Little boy! Of course I knew! No one has ever called
my mother ‘Frau Eva’ without loving her. How did it
happen? You sent a message either to me or to her today,
didn’t you?”

“Yes. I . . . did appeal ... I appealed to Frau Eva.”

“She was aware of it. She suddenly sent me away. I
must go to you. I had just been telling her the news
about Russia.”

We turned back and did not say much more; he un-
tied his horse and mounted.

It was in my room upstairs that I first realized how
much Demian’s news and still more the previous strain,
had exhausted me. But Frau Eva had heard me. I had
conveyed .the message of my heart. She would have come
herself — if — but how strange it all was and how funda-
mentally beautiful. Now there was to be a war, and what
we had so often talked about was to take place. Demian
had known so much about it beforehand. How strange
that the stream of the world would no longer be flowing
just vaguely somewhere — it would suddenly flow right
through our hearts. How strange that wild and fateful
adventure was calling us and that now or very soon the

178



THE BEGINNING OF THE END


moment had come when the world needed us, when it
would be transformed. Demian was right; we should not
sentimentalize the situation. The only remarkable thing
was that I was now to share my lonely ‘fate’ with so
many other men, with the whole world, in fact. So much
the better 1

I was prepared. When I walked .through the town
during the evening, every street corner was buzzing with
great excitement. The word ‘war’ was on everybody’s
lips.

I went to Frau Eva’s; we ate supper in the summer-
house. I was the only guest. No one said a word about
the war. Only later on, shortly before my departure, Eva
said, ‘‘Dear Sinclair, you appealed to me today. You
know why I didn’t come to you myself . . . But don’t
forget; you know how to get a message to me now; and
whenever you need someone who bears the ‘sign’ you
can appeal to me again.”

She rose to her feet and preceded me into the garden
twilight. Tall and queenly the woman of mystery
strolled among the silent trees and above her head the
myriad stars glowed tenderly.


I am coming to the end of my story. Events ran their
rapid course. The war soon came and Demian, wonder-
fully strange in his uniform with his silver-grey cljak,
left us. I accompanied his mother home. Soon I too
took my leave of her. She kissed me on the lips and
clasped me for a moment to her breast, and her large
eyes burned closely and steadfastly into mine.


179



DEMI AN


All men became as brothers. They .thought it was
patriotism and honour, but it was destiny into whose
unveiled face they were all momentarily allowed to
glance. Young men left their barracks, entrained, and on
many faces I could read a ‘sign’ — not ours but a noble
and worthy sign that meant devotion and death. I too
was embraced by men whom I had never seen before
and I understood and gladly responded. It was a kind
of intoxication that, it had nothing to do with the will
of destiny, but it was a noble intoxication and moving
because they had all stared into the eyes of fate for .that
brief, revealing moment.

It was nearly winter already when I was drafted to the
Front. To start with, despite the excitement of being
under fire for the first time, I was disillusioned. Formerly
I had pondered much on why man was capable of living
for an ideal on so few occasions. Now I saw that many,
indeed, all men were capable of dying for an ideal.
Only they had no use for a free, self-chosen ideal; it
must be shared and accepted.

As time went on, however, I saw that I had under-
estimated humanity.

However much service and common danger ironed
them out, I saw many men, living and dying, approach
the will of fate with great dignity . . . Many, very many,
wore not only during battle but at every moment of the
day, the distant, resolute, as it were fanatic look in their
eyes which knows nothing of aims, and signifies complete
absorption in the horror of the moment. Whatever they
might believe or think, they were ready, expendable,
from them the future would be shaped . . . And the

180



THE BEGINNING OF THE END


more the eyes of the world were focussed on. war,
heroism, honour and all the old ideals, the more remote
and increasingly improbable sounded any whisper of
apparent humanity; and yet all this was only on the
surface, in the way the question of foreign and political
aims of the war remained superficial. Deep down under-
neath something was taking shape. Something akin to
a new humanity. For I could see many — and many died
by my side — who were aware that hatred and rage,
slaughter and annihilation were not bound up with the
real, ultimate aims. No, the objectives like the goals were
quite fortuitous. Their most primitive, even their wildest
feelings were not for the enemy; their bloody task was
merely an outward radiation of the inner soul, the divi-
ded soul filled with the lust to rage and kill, annihilate
and die so that it might be born anew. A giant bird
was struggling out of the egg; the egg was the world
and the world must first be rent asunder.

One night in early spring I was standing in front of
a farm which we had occupied. A slight wind was blow-
ing in fitful gusts; over the higu Flanders sky rode armies
of clouds with a hint of moon somewhere behind them.
I had felt uneasy the whole day, tormented by vague
fears. Now as I stood on guard in the darkness, I pon-
dered deeply on the people who had figured in my life.
Frau Eva, Demian. 1 stood leaning against a poplar tree,
staring into the scurrying clouds where lurking rifts of
brightness were quickly transformed into large swelling
phantasmogoric shapes. I could feel by the strange weak-
ness of my pulse, the insensitivity of my skin to the wind
and rain, the readiness of my inner responses that a

181



DEMI AN


guide and leader was not far away from me.

A great town could be seen in the clouds and out of
it poured millions of men who spread in hosts over vast
landscapes. In their midst strode a mighty, godlike form
with shining stars in her hair, as huge as a mountain
but having the features of Frau Eva. The ranks of men
were swallowed up into her as into a gigantic cave and
vanished from sight. The goddess crouched on the
ground, the ‘sign’ shone on her brow. She seemed to
be in the grip of a dream. She closed her eyes and her
great countenance was twisted in pain. Suddenly she
called out, and from her forehead sprang stars, many
thousands of them which leaped in graceful curves across
the dark heavens.

One of the stars shot straight towards me with a clear,
ringing sound; it seemed to be seeking me out. Then it
burst with a roar into a thousand sparks, bore me aloft
and cast me down to the ground again; the world was
shattered above me with a thunderous roar . . .

They found me near the poplar covered with earth
and with many wounds.

I lay in a cellar, shells roared over me. I lay in a
waggon and staggered across devastated fields. Mostly I
slept and was unconscious. But the more deeply I slept,
the more strongly I felt that someone was drawing me
onwards, that I was held in tow by some force that had
mastery over me.

I lay in a stable on straw; it was dark. Someone had
trodden on my hand. But my inner self still pressed
forward and I was drawn on more forcefully than ever.
Again I lay on a waggon and later on a stretcher or a

182



THE BEGINNING OF THE END

ladder. More urgently than ever I felt I was being sum-
moned somewhere and that I must finally get there.

Now I was at my goal. It was night; I was fully
conscious. I had just felt an irresistible inner urge. Now
I lay in a room, in a bed on the floor and knew that I
had reached the place where I had been summoned. I
glanced around me. There was another mattress close
to mine occupied by someone who now bent forward to
look at me. He had the ‘sign’ on his forehead. It was
Demian.

I could not speak and he either could not or did not
want to. He was content to look at me. The light from a
lamp hung above him on the wall played on his face.
He smiled at me.

He gazed into my eyes for what seemed an infinity of
time. Slowly he edged his face nearer to mine until we
were almost .touching one another.

“Sinclair!” he whispered.

I indicated with a glance that I understood him. He
smiled again, almost as if in sympathy.

“Young ’un,” he said with a smile.

His lips were now quit' dose to mine. Quietly he
continued to speak.

“Can you still remember Franz Kromer?” he asked.
I blinked my assent and even managed to smile.

“Listen, young Sinclair, I’ve got to go. Perhaps you'll
need my help against Kromer or something else ... If
you send a message I shan’t come riding crudely on
horseback or by railway train next time. You’ll have to
listen to your inner voice and then you will hear me
speak within you. Do you understand? And there is

183



DEMI AN


something else. Frau Eva said that if* things ever went
badly with you, I was to pass on a kiss from her which
she gave me . . . Close your eyes, Sinclair."

I closed my eyes in obedience. I felt the brush of a
kiss on my lips on which there was a bead of blood that
never seemed to diminish. Then I fell asleep.

Next morning they woke me up; I had to have my
wounds dressed. When I was finally properly awake I
turned quickly towards the mattress next to mine. A
stranger lay on it whom I had never seen before.

The dressing was a painful business. So was every-
thing else that happened to me afterwards. But when
on the many such occasions I find the key and look deep
down into myself where the images of destiny lie slum-
bering in the dark mirror, I only need to bend my head
over the black mirror to see my own image which now
wholly resembles him, my friend and leader.


184



