Lord of the Flies

William Golding
1954



Despite its later popularity, William Golding’s
Lord of the Flies was only a modest success when
it was first published in England in 1954, and it
sold only 2,383 copies in the United States in 1955
before going out of print. Critical reviews and
British word of mouth were positive enough, how¬
ever, that by the time a paperback edition was pub¬
lished in 1959, Lord of the Flies began to challenge
The Catcher in the Rye as the most popular book
on American college campuses. By mid-1962 it had
sold more than 65,000 copies and was required
reading on more than one hundred campuses.

The book seemed to appeal to adolescents’ nat¬
ural skepticism about the allegedly humane values
of adult society. It also captured the keen interest
of their instructors in debating the merits and de¬
fects of different characters and the hunting down
of literary sources and deeper symbolic or allegor¬
ical meanings in the story—all of which were in no
short supply. Did the ending of the story—a mod¬
em retelling of a Victorian story of children
stranded on a deserted island—represent the vic¬
tory of civilization over savagery, or vice versa?
Was the tragic hero of the tale Piggy, Simon, or
Ralph? Was Golding’s biggest literary debt owed
to R. M. Ballantyne’s children’s adventure story
The Coral Island or to Euripides’s classic Greek
tragedy The Bacchae?

Though the popularity of Golding’s works as
a whole has ebbed and grown through the years.
Lord of the Flies has remained his most read book.
The questions raised above, and many more like


Novels for Students




Lord of the Flies


them, have continued to fascinate readers. It is for
this reason, more than any other, that many crit¬
ics consider Lord of the Flies a classic of our
times.


Author Biography


From an unknown schoolmaster in 1954, when
Lord of the Flies was first published, William Gold¬
ing became a major novelist over the next ten years,
only to fall again into relative obscurity after the
publication of the generally well-received The
Spire in 1964. This second period of obscurity
lasted until the end of the 1970s. The years 1979
to 1982 were suddenly fruitful for Golding, and in
1983 he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.
How does one account for a life filled with such
ups and downs? There can be no one answer to that
question, except perhaps to note that Golding’s
motto, “Nothing Twice,” suggests a man with an
inquiring mind who was not afraid to try many dif¬
ferent approaches to his craft. He knew that while
some of his efforts might fail, others would be all
the stronger for the attempt.

Bom in 1911, Golding was the son of an Eng¬
lish schoolmaster, a many-talented man who be¬
lieved strongly in science and rational thought.
Golding often described his father’s overwhelming
influence on his life. The author graduated from
Oxford University in 1935 and spent four years
(later described by Golding as having been
“wasted”) writing, acting, and producing for a
small London theater. Golding himself became a
schoolmaster for a year, after marrying Ann Brook¬
field in 1939 and before entering the British Royal
Navy in 1940.

Golding had switched his major from science
to English literature after two years in college—a
crucial change that marked the beginning of Gold¬
ing’s disillusion with the rationalism of his father.
The single event in Golding’s life that most affected
his writing of Lord of the Flies, however, was prob¬
ably his service in World War II. Raised in the shel¬
tered environment of a private English school,
Golding was unprepared for the violence unleashed
by the war. Joining the Navy, he was injured in
an accident involving detonators early in the war,
but later was given command of a small rocket-
launching craft. Golding was present at the sinking
of the Bismarck —the crown ship of the German
Navy—and also took part in the D-Day landings in



William Golding


France in June 1944. He later described his expe¬
rience in the war as one in which “one had one’s
nose rubbed in the human condition.”

After the war, Golding returned to teaching
English and philosophy at the same school where
he had begun his teaching career. During the next
nine years, from 1945 until 1954, he wrote three
novels rejected for their derivative nature before
finally getting the idea for Lord of the Flies. Af¬
ter reading a bedtime boys adventure story to his
small children, Golding wondered out loud to his
wife whether it would be a good idea to write such
a story but to let the characters “behave as they
really would.” His wife thought that would be a
“first class idea.” With that encouragement, Gold¬
ing found that writing the story, the ideas for
which had been germinating in his mind for some
time, was simply a matter of getting it down on
paper.

Golding went on to write ten other novels plus
shorter fiction, plays, essays, and a travel book. Yet
it is his first novel. Lord of the Flies, that made him
famous, and for which he will probably remain best
known. Golding died of a heart attack in 1993.


Volume 2


I 7 5






Lord of the Flies


Plot Summary


On the Island: Chapters 1-2

William Golding sets his novel Lord of the
Flies at a time when Europe is in the midst of nu¬
clear destruction. A group of boys, being evacu¬
ated from England to Australia, crash lands on a
tropical island. No adults survive the crash, and the
novel is the story of the boys’ descent into chaos,
disorder, and evil.

As the story opens, two boys emerge from the
wreckage of a plane. The boys, Ralph and Piggy,
begin exploring the island in hopes of finding other
survivors. They find a conch shell, and Piggy in¬
structs Ralph how to blow on it. When the other
boys hear the conch, they gather. The last boys to
appear are the choirboys, led by Jack Merridew.
Once assembled, the boys decide they need a chief
and elect Ralph. Ralph decides that the choir will
remain intact under the leadership of Jack, who
says they will be hunters.

Jack, Ralph, and Simon go to explore the is¬
land and find a pig trapped in vines. Jack draws his
knife, but is unable to actually kill the pig. They
vow, however, to kill the pig the next time. When
the three return, they hold a meeting. The conch
becomes a symbol of authority: whoever has the
conch has the right to speak. Jack and Ralph ex¬
plain to the others what they have found. Jack con¬
tinues his preoccupation with his knife. The boy
with the clearest understanding of their situation is
Piggy. He tells them they are on an island, that no
one knows where they are, and that they are likely
to be on the island for a very long time without
adults. Ralph replies, ‘This is our island. It’s a good
island. Until the grownups come to fetch us we’ll
have fun.” One of the “littluns,” the group of
youngest boys, says that he is afraid of the
“beastie.” The “biguns” try to dissuade him, say¬
ing there are no beasties on the island. However, it
is at this moment that Jack asserts himself against
Ralph, saying that if there were a beastie, he would
kill it.

Discussion returns to the possibility of rescue.
Ralph says that rescue depends on making a fire so
that ships at sea could see the smoke. The boys get
overly excited, with Jack as the ringleader, and all
but Piggy and Ralph rush off to the top of the moun¬
tain to build a fire. They forget about the conch and
the system of rules they have just made. At the top
of the mountain, Ralph uses Piggy’s glasses to light
the fire. They are careless and set fire to the moun¬
tain. Piggy accuses them of “acting like kids.” He


reminds the older boys of their responsibility to the
younger boys. At this moment they realize that one
of the littluns is missing.

The Beast: Chapters 3-11

The story resumes days later with Simon and
Ralph trying to build shelters on the shore. Jack is
away hunting. When he returns, there is antago¬
nism between Ralph and Jack. Jack is beginning to
forget about rescue and is growing tired of the re¬
sponsibility of keeping the fire going, a task for
which he has volunteered his choir. The growing
separation between the boys is marked by Ralph’s
insistence on the importance of shelter and Jack’s
on the hunting of meat.

In the next chapter, Golding describes the
rhythm of life on the island. By this point, Jack has
begun to paint his face with mud and charcoal when
he hunts. At a crucial moment, the fire goes out,
just as Ralph spots a ship in the distance. In the
midst of Ralph’s distress, the hunters return with a
dead pig. In the ensuing melee, one of the lenses
in Piggy’s glasses gets broken.

Ralph calls an assembly in order to reassert the
rules. The littluns bring up their fear of the beastie
yet again, saying that it comes from the sea. Simon
tries to suggest that the only beast on the island is
in themselves; however, no one listens. Ralph once
again calls for the rules. Jack, however, plays to
the fear of the boys, and says, “Bollocks to the
rules! We’re strong—we hunt! If there’s a beast,
we’ll hunt it down! We close in and beat and beat
and beat—!” The meeting ends in chaos. Ralph,
discouraged, talks with Piggy and Simon about
their need for adults. “If only they could get a mes¬
sage to us.... If only they could send us something
grownup ... a sign or something.”

The sign that appears, however, comes when
all the boys are asleep. High overhead rages an air
battle and a dead parachutist falls to the island.
When the boys hear the sound of the parachute,
they are sure it is the beast. Jack, Ralph, and Si¬
mon go in search. Climbing to the top of the moun¬
tain, they see “a creature that bulged.” They do not
recognize the figure as a dead parachutist, tangled
in his ropes, and swaying in the wind.

When the boys return to the littluns and Piggy
at the shelters, Jack calls an assembly. He calls
Ralph a coward and urges the boys to vote against
Ralph. They will not, and Jack leaves. Ralph tries
to reorganize the group, but notices that gradually
most of the biguns sneak off after Jack. The scene
shifts to Jack, talking to his hunters. They go off


/ 7 6


Novels for Students



Lord of the Flies


on a hunt in which they kill a sow, gruesomely and
cruelly. They cut off the pig’s head and mount it
on a stick in sacrifice to the beast. Meanwhile, Si¬
mon wanders into the woods in search of the beast.
He finds the head, now called in the text “The Lord
of the Flies.” Simon feels a seizure coming on as
he hallucinates a conversation with the head:

Simon’s head was tilted slightly up. His eyes could
not break away and the Lord of the Flies hung in
space before him.

“What are you doing out here all alone? Aren’t you
afraid of me?”

Simon shook.

“There isn’t anyone to help you. Only me. And I’m
the Beast.”

Simon’s mouth labored, brought forth audible words.
“Pig’s head on a stick.”

“Fancy thinking the Beast was something you could
hunt and kill!” said the head. For a moment or two
the forest and all the other dimly appreciated places
echoed with the parody of laughter. “You knew
didn’t you? I’m part of you? Close, close, close! I’m
the reason why it’s no go? Why things are what they
are?”

Simon falls into unconsciousness. When he
awakens, he finds the decomposed body of the
parachutist, and realizes that this is what the boys
think is the beast. He gently frees the dead man
from his ropes.

Back at the shelters, Ralph and Piggy are the
only ones left. The two go to see Jack and the
hunters, and they find a big party. At the height of
the party, a storm breaks and Simon arrives to tell
them that there is no beast. In a frenzy, they kill
Simon. Later, Ralph, Piggy, Sam, and Eric are
alone on the beach. All the boys agree that they left
the dance early and that they did not see anything.
The four boys try to keep the fire going, but they
cannot. Jack’s hunters attack the boys and steal
Piggy’s glasses so that they have the power of fire.
Enraged, Ralph and Piggy go to retrieve the glasses.
There is a fight, and Roger, the most vicious of the
hunters, launches a rock at Piggy, knocking the
conch from his hands, and sending him some forty
feet to the rocks in the sea below.

The Rescue: Chapter 12

The scene shifts to Ralph, alone, hiding from
the rest of the boys who are hunting him. The lan¬
guage used to describe the boys has shifted: they
are now “savages,” and “the tribe.” Ralph is utterly
alone, trying to plan his own survival. He finds the
Lord of the Flies, and hits the skull off the stick.



From the film Lord of the Flies, 1963.


Ralph sees Sam and Eric serving as lookouts for
the tribe and approaches them carefully. They warn
him off, saying that they’ve been forced to partic¬
ipate with the hunters. When Ralph asks what the
tribe plans on doing when they capture him, the
twins will only talk about Roger’s ferocity. They
state obliquely, “Roger sharpened a stick at both
ends.”

Ralph tells the twins where he will hide; but
soon the twins are forced to reveal this location and
Ralph is cornered. However, the tribe has once
again set the island on fire, and Ralph is able to
creep away under the cover of smoke. Back on the
beach, Ralph finds himself once again pursued. At
the moment that the savages are about to capture
him, an adult naval officer appears. Suddenly, with
rescue at hand, the savages once again become lit¬
tle boys and they begin to cry. The officer cannot
seem to understand what has happened on the is¬
land. “Fun and games,” he says, unconsciously
echoing Ralph’s words from the opening chapter.
Ralph breaks down and sobs, mourning Simon and
mourning Piggy. In the final line of the book, Gold¬
ing reminds the reader that although adults have ar¬
rived, the rescue is a faulty one. The officer looks
out to sea at his “trim cruiser in the distance.” The
world, after all, is still at war.


Volume 2


1 7 7






Lord of the Flies


Characters


Bill

Like Maurice, Bill is initially confused by the
clash of values among the boys. At first he seems
seduced by Jack’s painted face into joining the
hunters in their anonymity; yet he then turns fear¬
ful and runs away. Eventually, however. Bill imag¬
ines group hunting and “being savages” as “jolly
good fun” and thus a way of banishing these fears.
He tries to convince Ralph’s group to accept Jack’s
invitation to the feast, thinking that Jack is less fear¬
ful than Ralph about going into the jungle to hunt.
Soon he has defected to Jack’s group and is seen
painted like a savage and stalking Ralph.

Eric

See Samneric

Henry

Henry is the biggest littlun and a relative of
the littlun with the mulberry-marked face who dis¬
appears after the first big fire. Henry is the object
of Roger’s seemingly innocent game of throwing
stones. Later, Henry defects to Jack’s camp and is
part of the raiding party that steals fire from Ralph
and Piggy.

Johnny

Along with Percival, Johnny is the smallest of
the littluns. He is described as “well built, with fair
hair and a natural belligerence,” which he soon
shows by throwing sand in Percival’s face. Later,
Johnny is shown crying when he thinks Eric may
be bleeding from his encounter with Jack’s fire-
stealers.

The littlun with the mulberry-marked
face

Otherwise unidentified except as a distant rel¬
ative of Henry, this littlun was noticed immediately
after the boys came on the island; he is the first boy
to mention seeing a “snake-thing,” a “beastie [who]
came in the dark." He is not seen after the fire got
out of control. He is therefore the focus of much
anxiety, especially among Ralph’s group, which
had tried to make a special point of looking after
the littluns.

Percival Wemys Madison

Percival Wemys Madison, of the Vicarage,
Harcourt St. Anthony, Hants, as he has been taught
to introduce himself, is “mouse-colored and had not
been very attractive even to his mother.” Along


with Johnny, Percival is the smallest littlun. When
Ralph and Piggy are trying to seek a rational ex¬
planation for Phil’s dream of having seen and
fought with “twisty things in the trees,” they call
on Percival as someone who was supposed to have
been up that night and who might have been mis¬
taken for the fearful thing that has so terrorized the
littluns. But Percival’s mere recitation of his name
and address is enough to set off sad memories of
his former life. His wails, along with his specula¬
tion that the beast comes from the sea, soon set off
the other littluns on similar crying jags.

Maurice

One of the “biguns,” he is next in size to Jack
among the choir boys. Like most of the boys, he is
a mixture of potentially good and bad traits. Which
traits are developed depends on how strong the call
of society and law is over the powers of darkness
and savagery. In the beginning Maurice is helpful
by suggesting that the boys use green branches on
the fire to make smoke. He also makes the “lit¬
tluns” forget their sorrow by pretending to fall off
the twister log and making them laugh. Like Piggy,
Maurice wants to believe that the world is a scien¬
tific place where human fears can be explained and
needs can be met. Yet Maurice, who “of all the
boys ... was the most at home” on the island, is
still fearful that “we don’t know [about the beast],
do we? Not certainly, I mean....” Giving in to his
fears, Maurice joins Roger in asserting his power
by kicking over the littluns’ sand castles. He also
suggests adding a drum to the mock pig-killing rit¬
ual. Maurice’s capitulation to his repressive lean¬
ings is complete when he defects to Jack and helps
him steal fire from Piggy and Ralph.

Jack Merridew

Jack would have preferred to be called Mer¬
ridew, his last name, rather than a “kid name.” This
attitude may suggest the “simple arrogance” that
causes Jack to propose himself for chief. After all,
he exclaims, “I’m chapter chorister and head boy.”
(The rough American equivalents of these positions
might be president of the glee club and head of the
student council.) It’s true that Jack has the advan¬
tage of being tall; his direction of the choir is an¬
other sign of an “obvious leader.” As a political an¬
imal, however, Jack recognizes that choir
conducting won’t get him far on a deserted island.
His decision to turn the choir into a group of hunters
with himself as leader shows that he can be a wily
strategist. In other ways, however. Jack is careless
and destructive, as when he accidentally steps on


17 8


Novels for Students



Lord of the Flies


Piggy’s glasses and breaks a lens. Similarly, Jack
becomes so fixated with hunting that he neglects
the fire, which goes out before the boys can signal
a passing ship. Nevertheless, Jack is successful in
daring Ralph to come with him to hunt the myste¬
rious beast when darkness is falling. On that hunt
Jack and Ralph, joined by Roger, perceive through
the falling darkness the dim, shrouded figure of the
dead parachutist—an image of the adult world that
suggests the destruction of the rational society en¬
visioned by Ralph and Piggy.

As Ralph’s civilized world disintegrates,
Jack’s savage society becomes more distinct and
powerful. Jack separates his group from Ralph’s
when the group fails to dethrone Ralph and recog¬
nize Jack as leader. Then Jack sets about wooing
away the other boys to his group. One way is by
inviting everyone to a pig roast. Another is by
painting his hunters’ bodies and masking their
faces, thus turning them into an anonymous mob
of fighters who can wound and kill without fear of
being singled out as guilty. Significantly, it is Jack
who is the first of the older boys to see the possi¬
bility of the beast’s existence, and ultimately the
ways to use the fear of the beast to his advantage:
as a motivation for hunting, and as a means of keep¬
ing the littluns under his control. When Simon
seeks to expose the beast as just a “dead man on a
hill,” he is killed by Jack’s group.

With Jack’s successful theft of Piggy’s last
glass lens, the hunters’ raid on Ralph and Piggy’s
fire, the capture and defection of Sam and Eric, and
finally Piggy’s death, as engineered by Jack and
Roger, the “savages’” power is almost absolute.
Only the intervention of adult society, represented
by the British captain, is able to save Ralph from
being killed and to reduce Jack to embarrassed si¬
lence at his failure to harness the powers of evil.

Phil

One of the more self-confident littluns, Phil
straightforwardly describes his dream of the “twisty
things” when requested by Piggy.

Piggy

Piggy is an intelligent and rational boy whose
excess weight and asthma often make him the butt
of the others’ jokes. Yet because of his scientific
approach to problems. Piggy is a voice of reason
without whom Ralph’s leadership would have been
undermined far sooner. It is Piggy who not only
recognizes the significance of the conch but whose
spectacles enable Ralph to start the fire, whose
smoke is their only chance of being saved. It is


Media

Adaptations



• Lord of the Flies enjoys the unusual status of
being one of the few serious contemporary nov¬
els to have been made into a movie twice. The
first, directed by Peter Brook in 1963 with an
all-English cast, as has been described as “com¬
pelling,” but was only moderately successful at
the box office. Available from Home Vision
Cinema and Fusion Video.

• The remake in 1990 featured an American cast
and was directed by Harry Hook. While well-
photographed and “visceral,” with R-rated con¬
tent, it is generally regarded as inferior to
Brooks’s version. Available from Columbia
Tristar Home Video, The Video Catalog, and
New Line Home Video.

• An 89-minute sound recording on cassette (JRH
109), book, and study guide, produced in 1984
and featuring excerpts from the novel, are avail¬
able from the Listening Library, Old Greenwich,
CT.


Piggy who realizes that building the shelters is at
least as important for their long-term survival as
keeping the fire going. It is Piggy whose under¬
standing of the depths of Jack’s hatred for Ralph
forces Ralph to confront his despair at their
prospects for getting along. And it is Piggy who
makes the brilliant, however simple, suggestion
that the fire be moved down to the beach away from
the “beast from air.”

For all his intellectual powers, however, Piggy
is basically ineffectual without Ralph. Piggy is a
man of thought, not of action, and he is physically
weak because of his asthma. Without his specta¬
cles, he is blind and helpless. After Jack has bro¬
ken one lens from his glasses and stolen the other,
Piggy is doomed in a society where irrational fears
and physical strength are more respected than sci¬
ence, law, and dialogue. It is significant that Piggy
and the conch are both destroyed at the same time
by a huge rock rolled down a cliff by Roger, who


Volume 2


1 7 9


Lord of the Flies


has been freed by Jack from the “taboo of the old
life ... the protection of parents and school and po¬
licemen and the law” to unleash his savage in¬
stincts. Of all the children, Piggy is the most adult
in his appearance, behavior, and beliefs. His thin¬
ning hair, which never seems to grow, and his fre¬
quent appeals to “what grownups would do” sug¬
gest his maturity and wisdom. In the closing lines
of the book, Ralph weeps not only for “the end of
innocence, the darkness of man’s heart,” but for
“the fall through the air of the true, wise friend
called Piggy.”

Ralph

The fair-haired, tall, handsome Ralph is an ob¬
vious choice to lead the band of children stranded
on the island. He has a “directness” in his manner
that the narrator calls a sign of “genuine leader¬
ship.” As E. M. Forster describes Ralph in an in¬
troduction to one of novel’s editions, he is “sunny
and decent, sensible and considerate.” He seems to
be genuinely interested in the welfare of the entire
group and can get along with all kinds of people.
Perhaps he gets his sense of natural authority from
his father, a commander in the Navy. He also has
above-average powers of observation. He is the
first to see the conch shell buried in the sand,
though it is significant that it is Piggy who points
out how it can be used as a signaling device.

In fact, Ralph is far from the ideal leader, and
certainly far from the idealized Ralph in The Coral
Island, R. M. Ballantyne’s romantic children’s
story for which Golding intended his book to be a
reality check. Ralph lacks the charisma and strate¬
gic skills to get the other boys to recognize what
the conch represents—order, authority, dialogue,
democracy. These are the qualities that are neces¬
sary if the group is to keep its signal fire going long
enough to attract a passing ship. Golding often
notes the “shutter” or cloud that sometimes comes
over Ralph’s mind when he is addressing the group
and that prevents him from finding the right word
to get their attention or galvanize them to action.
This cloud of imperfection makes Ralph a kind of
everyman with whom we can each identify, but it
contributes to the gradual descent of the boys into
a savagery to which Ralph himself succumbs by
the end of the story.

Robert

Like Simon and Maurice, Robert is one of the
medium-sized boys on the lower end of the biguns’
spectrum. In the stripped-down world of the island
where the physical assumes more weight, Robert


finds his niche guarding Castle Rock. Robert is
more comfortable taking orders than giving them.
The one time he takes any initiative, pretending to
be the pig in a ritual game, he is quickly reduced
to a sniveling child. He also serves with Jack and
Maurice on the committee that welcomes Ralph’s
group to Jack’s feast.

Roger

Just as Piggy represents Ralph’s best quality,
his attempts to act mature, so Roger stands for
Jack’s worst characteristic, his lust for power over
living things. Roger is first introduced as one of the
biguns who “kept to himself with an inner inten¬
sity of avoidance and secrecy.” While Piggy thinks
about ways to be rescued, Roger is “gloomily” pes¬
simistic about the group’s chances. Acting on his
darker impulses, at first in small ways, he knocks
over Percival and Johnny’s sand castles. Then he
throws stones at Henry, only missing because his
arm “was conditioned by a civilization that knew
nothing of him and was in ruins.” Once he sees
how Jack’s “dazzle paint” created a mask that “lib¬
erated him from shame and self-consciousness,”
however, it is only a matter of time before Roger
comes under Jack’s power. First we see him, along
with Ralph and the rest, participate in the mock pig
kill in celebration of the successful hunt. Then, not
long after Jack secedes from the group, Roger fol¬
lows him and is soon hunting pigs and offering to
help Jack steal fire from Ralph’s group. Though
part of Roger still questions the irresponsibility of
some of Jack’s actions, like beating Wilfred, he
nevertheless goes along with them. It is Roger who.
“with a sense of delirious abandonment,” finally re¬
leases the boulder from Castle Rock that kills Piggy
and destroys the conch. And it is Roger who,
“wielding a nameless authority,” moves to detain
Sam and Eric.

Sam

See Samneric

Samneric

As twins, the two always act together and in¬
deed are often called Samneric as one unit. In the
beginning Sam and Eric are especially helpful to
Ralph, rekindling the fire on top of the mountain
after it almost goes out. Even after being scared by
the “beast from air,” the twins do not desert Ralph,
as Maurice and Roger do; instead the twins go with
Piggy to gather fruit for their own feast. After at¬
tending Jack’s pig roast, Sam and Eric return to
Ralph and Piggy’s shelters, the last “biguns” to re-


1 8 o


Novels for Students



Lord of the Flies


main loyal, though none will admit to the other that
they were in any way involved in Simon’s death.
Finally Sam and Eric are captured by Jack’s group
while accompanying Piggy and Ralph to demand
that Jack return Piggy’s glasses. In the ensuing con¬
frontation, Ralph attacks Jack and runs into the jun¬
gle, where his presence is then betrayed by the
twins, who fear for their lives.

Simon

Perhaps the most symbolic character in the
story, Simon represents the religious prophet or
seer who is sensitive and inarticulate yet who, of
all the boys, perhaps sees reality most clearly. Si¬
mon’s special powers are signaled early in the story
when, even though he is not one of the bigger boys,
he is chosen by Ralph to join him and Jack to ex¬
plore the island. Among all the boys, it is Simon
whose behavior is perhaps the most exemplary dur¬
ing the first part of the story. He is Ralph’s faith¬
ful helper in building the shelters. Simon alone rec¬
ognizes that “maybe [the beast is] only us” or just
a “pig’s head on a stick.” Simon, for all his sensi¬
tivity and fears, knows that the only way to deal
with fear is to face it. When no one else wants to
climb back up the mountain after seeing the “beast
from air,” it is Simon who proposes just such a
climb. “What else is there to do?” he reasons. And
even after Simon imagines the beast telling him,
with the “infinite cynicism of adult life,” that
“everything was a bad business,” he answers, “I
know that.” Ralph’s vision of how things are is all-
too-human and clouded compared to Simon’s,
though Simon must periodically retreat to the can¬
dle-budded trees in the forest to restore and main¬
tain this clearsightedness.

Yet even Simon faints with weakness and dis¬
gust after seeing the beast and imagining it saying,
“You knew, didn’t you? I’m part of you? ... I’m
the reason why it’s no go? Why things are what
they are?” When confronted with the realization
that he is isolated and cut off from the others in his
special knowledge, and just as afraid to die as any
of them, Simon begins to lose the vision that had
made him a potential savior of the group.

What began as a ritual and make-believe
killing of the pig as a way of celebrating a good
hunt now becomes a real ritual murder. Simon, in
an attempt to tell the others about his discovery of
the “man on the hill,” accidentally stumbles into a
ring of littluns and is killed in the confusion. The
shame that Ralph, Piggy, Sam, and Eric all feel the
day after Simon’s death, despite their attempts to
ignore it, show that civilized values still have some


hold on them. Yet the incident marks an important
turning point in the story, for it is the first time that
the boys have deliberately killed one of their own.


Themes


Good and Evil

During their abandonment on the island,
Ralph, Piggy, Simon, and many of the other boys
show elements of good in their characters. Ralph’s
calm “stillness,” and his attentiveness to others’
needs, make him a potentially good person. Good
may be defined here as something just, virtuous, or
kind that conforms to the moral order of the uni¬
verse. Piggy’s knowledge and belief in the power
of science and rational thought to help people un¬
derstand and thus control the physical world for
their mutual benefit are also obviously a force for
good. Simon, always ready to help out, sensitive to
the power of evil but not afraid to stand up to it, is
perhaps the strongest representative of the forces
of good in the story.

Yet all of these characters ultimately fall vic¬
tim to the forces of evil, as represented by the cru¬
elties of the hunters, especially Jack and Roger.
Piggy loses his glasses, and thus the power to make
fire. This power, when controlled by the forces of
reason, is a powerful tool for good: it warms the
boys, cooks their food, and provides smoke for the
rescue signals that are their only hope for survival.
But in the hands of those with less skill and knowl¬
edge, the fire becomes an agent of destruction—
first unintentionally in the hands of those who are
ignorant of its powers, then purposefully when Jack
and the hunters use it to smoke out and destroy their
opponents. It is Simon’s bad luck to stumble upon
the feasting group of boys with his news about the
“man on the hill” just as the group’s ritual pig hunt
is reaching its climax. Simon’s ritual killing, to
which Piggy and Ralph are unwitting yet complicit
witnesses, is perhaps the decisive blow in the bat¬
tle between the forces of good and evil. Later Piggy
loses his life at the hand of the almost totally evil
Roger, who has loosed the boulder from Castle
Rock. Now, without Piggy’s glasses and wise coun¬
sel and Simon’s steadfastness, Ralph is greatly
weakened, and to survive he must ultimately be res¬
cued by adult society, represented by the British
captain. It is important, however, to note that Jack,
too, is defeated because he cannot control the forces
of evil. It is Jack’s order to use fire to destroy
Ralph’s hiding place that virtually destroys the is-


Volume 2


18 1



Lord of the Flies


Topics for
Further

Studv

*

• Compare and contrast the attitudes of Piggy,
Ralph, Jack, and Simon toward the environment,
as shown in the novel. Argue whether there is
or is not any hope for environmental conserva¬
tion as illustrated in the story.

• Research the weather, plant and animal life, and
ocean life of a tropical island in the Pacific
Ocean. Imagine you have been abandoned on
the island and write a week-long journal detail¬
ing how you would survive there.

• Research actual instances of groups of adults or
children being abandoned in the wilderness.
Compare the outcomes of these cases to the
events that occur in Lord of the Flies.

• Read one of the inspirations for Lord of the
Flies, R. M. Ballantyne’s The Coral Island.
Compare the characters and events of the two
books, and argue which book you think portrays
a more realistic outcome. Use examples from
the text to support your argument.


land, although, ironically, it is the smoke from that
fire that finally attracts the British ship and leads
to the boys’ rescue.

Appearances and Reality

At several points in the story, Golding is at
pains to stress the complexity of human life. Dur¬
ing the novel, neither a firm grasp of reality (rep¬
resented by Piggy’s scientific bent and the island’s
ocean side) nor the comfort of illusions (seen in
Ralph’s daydreaming, Simon’s silent communion
with nature among the candlebud trees, and sym¬
bolized by the sleepy lagoon side of the island) is
enough to save the boys from the forces of evil.
The sun, which should represent life and the power
of reason, can also be blinding. Yet darkness is no
better, as can be seen when the littluns’ fantasies
and fears are only further distorted by nighttime
shadows. This sense of complexity is perhaps best
summed up by Ralph, speculating on how shadows


at different times of day change the appearance of
things: “If faces were different when lit from above
or below—what was a face? What was anything?”
This comment can also relate to the power of the
painted faces of Jack’s hunters to remove the
hunters from a sense of individual responsibility for
their masked deeds.

Reason and Emotion

Because of Golding’s great interest in Greek
and Roman mythology, this theme is sometimes
summarized by critics as the conflict between the
Apollonian and the Dionysian aspects of life. This
refers to the Greek gods Apollo, the god of reason,
and Dionysus, the god of wine and emotion. Most
characters in the story show elements of both rea¬
son and emotion. Piggy, with his interest in science
and fact, may seem to represent the life of reason,
while Jack and the hunters may seem to represent
the emotional side of life. To Golding, however,
matters are not that simple. Just as in Greek mythol¬
ogy the grave of Dionysus is found within the tem¬
ple of Apollo at Delphi, so in the story reason and
emotion may battle with each other within the same
character. Thus when Roger first throws rocks, his
arm is conditioned by rational society to avoid hit¬
ting the littlun Henry. Later his emotions will over¬
come his reason and he will loose the boulder that
kills Piggy. Sometimes Golding shows the strug¬
gle between reason and emotion using two charac¬
ters, as when Ralph the daydreamer struggles to re¬
member the rational ideas Piggy told him about
rescue. In the end, reason, in the form of the British
captain, seems to triumph over the runaway emo¬
tion that has led to the destruction of the island and
at least two of its temporary inhabitants. But the
reflective reader will remember that the world to
which the captain will presumably be trying to re¬
turn has, in fact, been destroyed by an atom bomb.
This suggests that in the end the grand achieve¬
ments of science, compounded with the irrational
emotions of warring powers, may have spelled the
doom of humanity.

Morals and Morality

Golding himself has said that the writing of
Lord of the Files was “an attempt to trace the de¬
fects of society back to the defects of human na¬
ture.” Golding sets a group of children, who should
supposedly be closest to a state of innocence, alone
on an island without supervision. In this fashion,
he can test whether the defects of society lie in the
form of society or in the individuals who create it.
Ralph tries to maintain order and convince the boys



18 2


Novels for Students


Lord of the Flies


to work for the common good, but he can’t over¬
come the selfishness of Jack and his hunters. By
the time Piggy makes his plea for the return of his
glasses—“not as a favor ... but because what’s
right’s right”—Jack and his gang can no longer rec¬
ognize a moral code where law and cooperation is
best and killing is wrong. As the author once com¬
mented, “the moral is that the shape of a society
must depend on the ethical nature of the individual
and not on any political system.”


Style


Point of View

All novels use at least one perspective, or point
of view, from which to tell the story. This may con¬
sist of a point of view of no single character (the
omniscient, or “all-knowing” point of view), a sin¬
gle character, multiple characters in turn, and com¬
binations or variations on these. Golding uses the
omniscient point of view, which enables him to
stand outside and above the story itself, making no
reference to the inner life of any of the individual
characters. From this lofty point he comments on
the action from the point of view of a removed, but
observant, bystander. Golding has commented in
interviews that the strongest emotion he personally
feels about the story is grief. Nevertheless, as the
narrator he makes a conscious decision, like the
British captain at the end of the story, to “turn
away” from the shaking and sobbing boys and re¬
main detached. The narrator lets the actions, as
translated through the artist’s techniques of sym¬
bolism, structure, and so on, speak for themselves.
Even so dramatic and emotional an event as Piggy’s
death is described almost clinically: “Piggy fell
forty feet and landed on his back across that square
red rock in the sea. His head opened and stuff came
out and turned red.”

Symbolism

A symbol can be defined as a person, place, or
thing that represents something more than its lit¬
eral meaning. The conch shell, to take an obvious
example in the story, stands for a society of laws
in which, for example, people take their turn in
speaking. The pig’s head is a more complex ex¬
ample of a symbol. To Simon, and to many read¬
ers, it can have more than one meaning. On a ra¬
tional level, Simon knows the pig’s head is just that:
a “pig’s head on a stick.” But on a more emotional
level, Simon realizes that the pig’s head represents
an evil so strong that it has the power to make him


faint. When he thinks of the head as “The Lord of
the Flies,” the symbol becomes even more power¬
ful, as this title is a translation of “Beelzebub,” an¬
other name for the Devil. Similarly, the fire set by
using Piggy’s glasses, when controlled, could be
said to represent science and technology at their
best, serving humans with light and heat. When un¬
controlled, however, fire represents science and
technology run amok, killing living things and de¬
stroying the island. Simon himself can be said to
symbolize Christ, the selfless servant who is always
helping others but who dies because his message—
that the scary beast on the hill is only a dead para¬
chutist—is misunderstood. Throughout the story,
the noises of the surf, the crackling fire, the boul¬
ders rolling down hills, and trees exploding from
the fire’s heat are often compared to the boom of
cannons and drum rolls. In this way, Golding re¬
minds us that the whole story is intended to repeat
and symbolize the atomic war which preceded it.

Setting

In the setting for Lord of the Flies, Golding
has created his own “Coral Island”—an allusion,
or literary reference, to a book of that name by
R. M. Ballantyne. Using the same scenario of boys
being abandoned on a tropical island. The Coral Is¬
land (1857) is a classic boys’ romantic adventure
story, like Johann Wyss’s The Swiss Family Robin¬
son, in which everyone has a great time and no¬
body dies or ends up unhappy. Golding, however,
has quite different ideas, and he has used the set¬
ting in his story to reinforce those concepts. Yes,
the island can be a wonderful place, as the littluns
discover by day when they are bathing in the la¬
goon pool or eating fruit from the trees. But at night
the same beach can be the setting for nightmares,
as some boys fancy that they see “snake-things” in
the trees.

Golding builds a similar contrast between the
generally rocky side of the island that faces the sea,
and the softer side that faces the lagoon. On the
ocean side of the island, “the filmy enchantments
of mirage could not endure the cold ocean water....
On the other side of the island, swathed at midday
with mirage, defended by the shield of the quiet la¬
goon, one might dream of rescue; but here, faced
by the brute obtuseness of the ocean ... one was
helpless.” Thus the setting reinforces Golding’s
view of human nature as a struggle of good inten¬
tions and positive concepts like love and faith
against the harshness of nature and human failings
like anger.


Volume 2


1 8 3



Lord of the Flies


Historical Context


Golding and World War II

“When I was young, before the war, I did have
some airy-fairy views about man.... But I went
through the war and that changed me. The war
taught me different and a lot of others like me,”
Golding told Douglas A. Davis in the New Repub¬
lic. Golding was referring to his experiences as cap¬
tain of a British rocket-launching craft in the North
Atlantic, where he was present at the sinking of
the Bismarck, crown ship of the German navy, and
participated in the D-Day invasion of German-


occupied France. He was also directly affected by
the devastation of England by the German air force,
which severely damaged the nation’s infrastructure
and marked the beginning of a serious decline in
the British economy. Wartime rationing continued
well into the postwar period. Items like meat, bread,
sugar, gasoline, and tobacco were all in short sup¬
ply and considered luxuries. To turn their country
around, the government experimented with nation¬
alization of key industries like coal, electric power,
and gas companies as well as the transportation
industry. Socialized medicine and government-
sponsored insurance were also introduced. Such


18 4


Novels for Students



Lord of the Flies


Compare

&

Contrast


• 1950s: Economically, Great Britain was devas¬
tated by World War II. Homes, factories, rail¬
roads, docks, and other facilities had been de¬
stroyed by the German air force. Rationing of
bread, meat, sugar, and gasoline continued well
into the postwar period. Formerly a creditor, or
lending nation. Great Britain for the first time
in its history became a debtor nation.

Today: Great Britain has regained economic
stability, though not the economic power it had
enjoyed before World War II. The discovery of
oil in the North Sea and membership in the Eu¬
ropean Union (despite occasional disagree¬
ments) have enhanced Great Britain’s economic
strength.

• 1950s: Politically, Great Britain was ruled in the
immediate post-World War II period by the La¬
bor Party, under which basic industries like coal,
electric power, gas, and transportation were na¬
tionalized, social security was expanded, and
universal health care was made available. With
the coming of the Cold War, Great Britain sided


with its World War II ally the United States
against Russian expansionism, although a strong
strain of antinuclear activism arose, centered
around the placement of American nuclear mis¬
siles on British bases.

Today: Great Britain remains politically strong,
though a separatist movement in Northern Ire¬
land continues to cause unrest. With the fall of
the Berlin Wall and the end of the Cold War,
Great Britain has been able to focus its energies
more on domestic problems and regional coop¬
eration.

• 1950s: Biologically oriented psychologists like
Arnold Gesell believe that a child’s intellectual
development is only marginally affected by en¬
vironment, while other scientists argue that it
plays a dominant role.

Today: Scientific studies using brain scans have
shown physical differences between the brains
of healthy children and abused children, sug¬
gesting experiences can actually change the cir¬
cuity of the brain.


changes, and the difficult conditions that produced
them, suggest the climate of the postwar years in
which Golding wrote Lord of the Flies.

The Geography of a Tropical Island

Although highly romanticized in both Western
fiction and nonfiction, life on a typical tropical is¬
land is not all that easy. The weather is usually very
hot and humid, and there is no breeze once one en¬
ters the jungle. While fish abound in the surround¬
ing waters and the scent of tropical flowers wafts
through the air, one must still watch out for sharks,
and one cannot live on a diet of fruit and flowers.
James Fahey, a naval seaman who served in the Pa¬
cific islands during the war, concluded: “We do not
care too much for this place, the climate takes the
life right out of you.”


The Political Climate of the 1950s

The rise of the Cold War between the Soviet
Union (U.S.S.R.) and the western powers after the
end of World War II signaled a new phase in world
geopolitics. Actual wars during the 1950s were
confined to relatively small-scale conflicts, as in
Korea (involving the United States) and Vietnam
(involving the French). The nonviolent yet still
threatening sabre-rattling between the USSR and
the United States, however, reached a peak with the
first successful hydrogen bomb test by the United
States on November 1, 1952, at Eniwetok Atoll in
the Pacific. A second device, hundreds of times
more powerful than the atomic bombs dropped over
Japan, was successfully detonated on March 1,
1954, at Bikini Atoll. In the United States, public
fallout shelters were designated for large cities, al-


Volume 2


18 5


Lord of the Flies


legedly to protect citizens from the rain of ra¬
dioactive materials produced by such nuclear ex¬
plosions. Schoolchildren practiced taking cover un¬
der their desks during regular air raid drills. Also
in 1954, Canada and the United States agreed to
build a “DEW” line (Distant Early Warning Line)
of radar stations across the Arctic to warn of ap¬
proaching aircraft or missiles over the Arctic. In
short, the atmosphere of the first half of the 1950s
was one of suspicion, distrust, and threats among
the big powers. An atomic war on the scale that
Lord of Flies suggested did not seem out of the
realm of possibility during the early 1950s.


Critical Overview


Lord of the Flies has attracted an immense
amount of both favorable and unfavorable criti¬
cism. Most vehement among the latter critics are
Kenneth Rexroth, whose essay in the Atlantic
Monthly castigated the author for having written a
typical “rigged” “thesis novel” whose characters
“never come alive as real boys.” In the same camp
is Martin Green (1960), who criticizes Golding’s
early works, including Lord of the Flies, as “not
importantly original in thought or feeling.” Other¬
wise admiring critics like James R. Baker have
claimed that the popularity of the book peaked by
the end of the 1960s because of that decade’s naive
view of humanity and rejection of original sin.

Among critics who admire Lord of the Flies,
there is remarkable disagreement about the book’s
influences, genre, significant characters, and
theme, not to mention the general philosophy of the
author. Frank Kermode’s early essay, excerpts of
which appear in Baker & Ziegler’s casebook edi¬
tion of the novel, examines R. M. Ballantyne’s Vic¬
torian boys’ adventure story The Coral Island as
Golding’s primary influence. He interprets Gold¬
ing’s book as a powerful story, capable of many
interpretations, precisely because of the author’s
“mythopoeic power to transcend” his own allegor¬
ical “programme.” Bernard F. Dick, while ac¬
knowledging The Coral Island’s influence, builds
on Kermode’s observation that the book’s strength
is grounded in its mythic level by tracing the in¬
fluence of the Greek dramatists, especially Euripi¬
des, whose play The Bacchae Golding himself ac¬
knowledged as an important source of his thinking.
Dick notes that The Bacchae and Lord of the Flies
both “portray a bipolar society in which the Apol¬
lonian [represented by Ralph] refuses or is unable


to assimilate the Dionysian [represented by the
hunters].” Dick finds fault with the author’s hav¬
ing profound thoughts come out of the mouths of
children, especially Simon. The critic recognizes,
however, that this flaw grew out of Golding’s de¬
cision to model his characters on the children in
Coral Island. Nevertheless Dick is an overall ad¬
mirer of Golding’s craft in producing a work whose
“foundation ... is mythic” yet which is perhaps
most accurately called a “serious parody.”

Using a psychoanalytic approach to the novel,
Claire Rosenfield (1961) finds yet another source
for Golding’s ideas in psychoanalyst Sigmund
Freud’s Totem and Taboo. Golding claimed in an
interview that he had read “absolutely no Freud.”
Even so, Rosenfield’s close reading argues that
Golding must have been influenced, directly or in¬
directly, by Freudian ideas. Rosenfield reminds us
that according to Freud, gods and devils are basi¬
cally human processes projected into the outer
world. Specifically, “Ralph is a projection of man’s
good impulses from which we derive the authority
figures—whether god, king, or father.... Jack be¬
comes an extemalization of the evil instinctual
forces of the unconscious.” Piggy, whose knowl¬
edge of science, thinning hair, and respect for adults
make him the most adultlike child on the island, is
both a father figure and a symbol of the progres¬
sive degeneration of the boys from adults to ani¬
malistic savages.

The abundance of possible critical stances on
Lord of the Flies is summarized by Patrick Reilly
in his chapter “The Strife of Critics” from his study
“Lord of the Flies”: Fathers and Sons. Reilly notes
that the book “has been read as a moral fable of
personal disintegration, as a social fable of social
regression, as a religious fable of the fali of man.”
One critic is sure that civilization is victorious in
the book, while another scoffs at the very idea that
the book ends happily.

Reilly himself puts Golding’s work squarely
in the tradition of the “dark epiphany” as used in
Jonathan Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels. Both authors
work under the notion that man is so thoroughly
corrupted that his redemption as a species is hope¬
less, however gallant and inspirational individual
attempts may be. Thus the reader of Golding at the
end of book is left wondering how, if the world has
been destroyed by atomic war, the captain and his
ship will be rescued after he has rescued the boys.
Reilly, however, does find hope in the figure of Si¬
mon. whose slow death ennobles him as a “hero,
saint, martyr,” in contrast to Piggy’s quick dispatch


18 6


Novels for Students



Lord of the Flies


and equally sudden disappearance. Thus the dark¬
ness within man as a whole in the story is balanced
by the “brightness within” individual hearts, and
Reilly concludes that “if we cannot be certain of
salvation, perhaps it is enough to sustain us if we
know that the darkness need not prevail.”


Criticism


Diane Andrews Henningfeld

Henningfeld is a professor at Adrian College.
In the following essay, she explores how Golding’s
novel can be interpreted in a variety of different
ways—including as political, psychological, and
religious allegory.

Lord of the Flies, William Golding’s first
novel, was published in London in 1954 and in New
York in 1955. Golding was forty-three years old
when he wrote the novel, having served in the
Royal Navy during the Second World War. Ac¬
cording to Bernard Oldsey, “The war appears to
have been an important influence on him.”

Lord of the Flies is deliberately modeled after
R. M. Ballantyne’s 1857 novel The Coral Island.
In this story, a group of English boys are ship¬
wrecked on a tropical island. They work hard to¬
gether to save themselves. The only evil in the book
is external and is personified by a tribe of canni¬
bals that live on the island. The book offers a Vic¬
torian view of the world: through hard work and
earnestness, one can overcome any hardship.

By giving his characters the same names as
those in Ballantyne’s book and by making direct
reference to The Coral Island in the text of Lord
of the Flies, Golding clearly wants readers to see
his book as a response to the Victorian world view.
Golding’s view is a much bleaker one: the evil on
the island is internal, not external. At the end of the
book, the adult naval officer who invokes The
Coral Island almost serves as Ballantyne’s voice:
“I should have thought that a pack of British boys—
you’re all British, aren’t you?—would have been
able to put up a better show than that.” Golding’s
understanding of the world, colored by his own ex¬
periences in World War II, is better represented by
Ralph’s weeping “for the end of innocence, the
darkness of man’s heart, and the fall through the
air of the true, wise friend called Piggy.”

Initially, critics commented less on the novel
as a work of art than on its political, religious, and
psychological symbolism. For example, James
Stem in a 1955 review for The New York Times


What
Do I Read
Next?

• Euripides’ s ancient Greek tragedy The Bacchae,
(405 BC), whose influence on Lord of the Flies
is widely acknowledged, dramatizes the influ¬
ence of the worship of Dionysus on the city of
Thebes. In the play, King Pentheus tries to stop
the Bacchantes’ Dionysian ceremony and as a
result is taken for a wild animal and killed by
his mother.

• Just as Lord of the Flies is a post-World War II
response to R. M. Ballantyne’s The Coral Is¬
land, so Golding’s next novel, The Inheritors
(1955), is a realistic response to H. G. Wells’s
optimistic theory of history as propounded in his
Outline of History.

• Animal Farm by George Orwell (1945), like
Lord of the Flies, is an allegory influenced by
its author’s war experiences, and one that probes
the nature of man and his attempts to form a just
society.

• The view of man and society in J. D. Salinger’s
Catcher in the Rye (1951), in which a psycho¬
logically convalescing young man looks back on
his experiences, has often been contrasted with
the perspective of Golding’s novel, and both
books have been campus favorites at different
times.

• Praised for its style of its prose, Marianne Wig-
gin’s 1 989 novel John Dollar has been described
as a “girl’s version” of Lord of the Flies. Set in
the 1910s, the novel follows a group of girls and
their blinded schoolmistress who are stranded
on an island near Burma after a storm.


Book Review wrote “Lord of the Flies is an alle¬
gory on human society today, the novel’s primary
implication being that what we have come to call
civilization is at best no more than skin deep.”

Indeed, many critics have argued that Lord of
the Flies is an allegory. An allegory is a story in
which characters, setting, objects, and plot stand



Volume 2


1 8 7



Lord of the Flies


for a meaning outside of the story itself. Frequently,
the writers of allegory illustrate an abstract mean¬
ing by the use of concrete images. For example,
George Orwell, in Animal Farm, uses animals and
the barnyard as concrete representations of the
Russian Revolution. Often, characters in allegories
personify some abstract quality. In the medieval
drama Everyman, for instance, the concrete char¬
acter Everyman stands for all of humanity.

While it is possible to read Lord of the Flies
as allegory, the work is so complex that it can be
read as allegorizing the political state of the world
in the postwar period; as a Freudian psychological
understanding of human kind; or as the Christian
understanding of the fall of humankind, among oth¬
ers.

As a political allegory, each character in Lord
of the Flies represents some abstract idea of gov¬
ernment. Ralph, for example, stands for the good-
hearted but not entirely effective leader of a de¬
mocratic state, a ruler who wants to rule by law
derived from the common consent. Piggy is his ad¬
viser, someone who is unable to rule because of his
own social and physical shortcomings, but who is
able to offer sound advice to the democratic leader.
Jack, on the other hand, represents a totalitarian dic¬
tator, a ruler who appeals to the emotional re¬
sponses of his followers. He rules by charisma and
hysteria. Roger, the boy who takes the most joy in
the slaughter of the pigs and who hurls the rock
that kills Piggy, represents the henchman necessary
for such a totalitarian ruler to stay in power.

Such a reading takes into account the state of
the world at the end of the World War II. For many
years, leaders such as British Prime Minister Win¬
ston Churchill and U.S. President Franklin D. Roo¬
sevelt led democratic countries against totalitarian
demigods such as Germany’s Adolf Hitler and
Italy’s Benito Mussolini. Further, in the early
1950s, the world appeared to be divided into two
camps: the so-called Free World of Western Eu¬
rope and the United States, and the so-called Iron
Curtain world of communist eastern Europe and the
Soviet Union. At the time of the writing of Lord of
the Flies, the world appeared to be teetering on the
brink of total nuclear annihilation. Thus, by taking
into account the historical context of Lord of the
Flies, it is possible to understand the work as po¬
litical and historical allegory, even as a cautionary
tale for the leaders of the world.

Freudian psychological critics, on the other
hand, are able to read Lord of the Flies as an alle¬
gory of the human psychology. In such a reading.


each of the characters personifies a different aspect
of the human psyche: the id, the super ego, and the
ego. According to Freud, the id (located in the un¬
conscious mind) works always to gratify its own
impulses. These impulses, often sexual, seek to pro¬
vide pleasure without regard to the cost. Jack’s im¬
pulse to hunt and kill reaches its peak with the
killing of the sow pig, a killing rife with sexual
overtones. Jack never considers anything but his
own pleasure; thus he can be considered an alle¬
gorical representation of the id. The superego is the
part of the mind that seeks to control the impulsive
behavior of the id. It acts as an internal censor. In
Lord of the Flies, Piggy serves this role. He con¬
stantly reminds Ralph of their need to keep the fire
burning and to take proper responsibility for the lit-
tluns. By so doing, he urges Ralph to control Jack.
Piggy understands that Jack hates him, because he
stands between Jack and his achievement of plea¬
sure. Further, just as the superego must employ the
ego to control the id, Piggy cannot control Jack on
his own; he must rely on Ralph to do so. Finally,
the ego is the conscious mind whose role it is to
mediate between the id’s demand for pleasure and
the social pressures brought to bear by the super¬
ego. Freud calls this mediation process the reality
principal; that is, the notion that immediate plea¬
sure must be denied in order to avoid painful or
deadly consequences. Ralph clearly fills this role.
He attempts to control Jack and engage his energy
for the tending of the fire. To do so requires him
to put off the pleasure of the hunt in order to se¬
cure rescue. In a Freudian reading of The Lord of
the Flies, Golding seems to be saying that without
the reinforcement of social norms, the id will con¬
trol the psyche.

Finally, it is possible to read Lord of the Flies
as a religious allegory. In such a reading, the trop¬
ical island, filled with fruit and everything needed
for sustenance, becomes a symbol of the Garden of
Eden. The initial identification of the beastie as a
snake also brings to mind the story of the Fall of
Man. Indeed, it is possible to read the fall of the
parachutist as the event which leads to the ouster
from Eden of the boys. Further, Jack’s identifica¬
tion with hunting and Ralph's identification with
shelter as well as their natural antagonism appear
to be allegorization of the Cain and Abel story. In¬
deed, it is only the intercession of the adult who
comes looking for them which saves Ralph from
murder. Many critics have attempted to read Simon
as a Christ figure; he is the one boy who has the
true knowledge which can save them. Like Christ,
he is martyred. Unlike Christ, however, his death


18 8


Novels for Students



Lord of the Flies


seems to have no significance for the boys; his
knowledge dies with him.

More recently, critics have recognized the
technical and artistic skill exhibited by Golding in
Lord of the Flies. Especially notable is the way in
which Golding fuses allegorical structure with
strong, realistic descriptions, well-developed char¬
acterizations, and a coherent, fast moving plot. The
description of the death of Piggy, for example,
demonstrates Golding’s skill with realistic, graphic
prose:

The rock struck Piggy a glancing blow from chin to
knee; the conch exploded into a thousand white frag¬
ments and ceased to exist. Piggy, saying nothing,
with no time for even a grunt, traveled through the
air sideways from the rock, turning over as he went.

The rock bounded twice and was lost in the forest.
Piggy fell forty feet and landed on his back across
the square red rock in the sea. His head opened and
stuff came out and turned red. Piggy’s arms and legs
twitched a bit, like a pig’s after it has been killed.
Then the sea breathed again in a long, slow sigh, the
water boiled white and pink over the rock; and when
it went, sucking back again, the body of Piggy was
gone.

Golding also provides strong characteriza¬
tions. While it is possible to see each boy fulfill¬
ing an allegorical role, none of the characters (with
the possible exception of Simon) functions solely
as part of the allegory. This can perhaps best be
seen in the development of Jack. During the first
trip into the jungle, he is unable to kill the pig with
his knife; by the end of the book he is hunting hu¬
man quarry. Jack’s growth from choirboy to mur¬
derer is accomplished with great skill.

Finally, Golding writes a fast-moving, sus¬
penseful adventure story. The book moves quickly
from the first days on the beach to the final hunt
scene, reaching a feverish pitch that is broken
abruptly by the appearance of the naval officer, just
as it appears that Ralph will be killed. While the
appearance of the adult, however, closes the action,
it does not provide us with a happy ending. Indeed,
at the moment of the climax of the adventure story,
Golding suddenly reminds us of the allegorical na¬
ture of the book: the naval officer’s cruiser is a
weapon of war. Although we feel relief over
Ralph’s rescue, we suddenly understand that the
adult world is little different from the world of the
island, a place where men hunt and kill each other
indiscriminately, a place where men can blow up
the entire planet, our island in the sea of the uni¬
verse.

Source: Diane Andrews Henningfeld, in an essay for Nov¬
els for Students, Gale, 1997.


Paul Slayton

In the following excerpt, Slayton finds Lord of
the Flies to be a parable about modem civilization
and human morality, and describes Golding’s lit¬
erary techniques.

Lord of the Flies is William Golding’s parable
of life in the latter half of the twentieth century, the
nuclear age, when society seems to have reached
technological maturity while human morality is still
prepubescent. Whether or not one agrees with the
pessimistic philosophy, the idiocentric psychology
or the fundamentalist theology espoused by Gold¬
ing in the novel, if one is to use literature as a “win¬
dow on the world,” this work is one of the panes
through which one should look.

The setting for Lord of the Flies is in the lit¬
erary tradition of Daniel Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe
and Johann Wyss’s The Swiss Family Robinson,
and like these earlier works provides the necessary
ingredients for an idyllic utopian interlude. A plane
loaded with English school boys, aged five through
twelve, is being evacuated to a safe haven in, per¬
haps, Australia to escape the “Reds,” with whom
the English are engaged in an atomic war. Some¬
where in the tropics the plane is forced to crash
land during a violent storm. All the adults on board
are lost when the forward section of the plane is
carried out to sea by tidal waves. The passenger
compartment, fortuitously, skids to a halt on the is¬
land, and the young passengers escape uninjured.

The boys find themselves in a tropical par¬
adise: bananas, coconuts and other fruits are pro¬
fusely available. The sea proffers crabs and occa¬
sional fish in tidal pools, all for the taking. The
climate is benign. Thus, the stage is set for an idyl¬
lic interlude during which British fortitude will en¬
able the boys to master any possible adversity. In
fact, Golding relates that just such a nineteenth cen¬
tury novel, R. M. Ballantyne’s Coral Island, was
the inspiration for Lord of the Flies. In that utopian
story the boy castaways overcame every obstacle
they encountered with the ready explanation, “We
are British, you know!”

Golding’s tropical sojourners, however, do not
“live happily ever after.” Although they attempt to
organize themselves for survival and rescue, con¬
flicts arise as the boys first neglect, then refuse,
their assigned tasks. As their “society” fails to build
shelters or to keep the signal fire going, fears em¬
anating from within—for their environment is to¬
tally non-threatening—take on a larger than life re¬
ality. Vines hanging from trees become “snake


Volume 2


l 8 9



Lord of the Flies


things” in the imaginings of the “little’uns.” A
nightmare amidst fretful sleep, causing one of the
boys to cry out in the night, conjures up fearful
“beasties” for the others. Their fears become more
real than existence on the tropical paradise itself
when the twins, Sam ’n Eric, report their enervat¬
ing experience with the wind-tossed body of the
dead parachutist. Despite Simon’s declaration that
“there is no beast, it’s only us,” and Piggy’s dis¬
avowal of “ghosts and things,” the fear of the un¬
known overcomes their British reserve and under
Jack's all-too-willing chieftainship the boys’ retreat
from civilization begins.

In the initial encounter with a pig, Jack is un¬
able to overcome his trained aversion to violence
to even strike a blow at the animal. Soon, however,
he and his choirboys-tumed-hunters make their first
kill. They rationalize that they must kill the ani¬
mals for meat. The next step back from civilization
occurs and the meat pretext is dropped; the real ob¬
jective is to work their will on other living things.

Then, killing begins to take on an even more
sinister aspect. The first fire the boys build to at¬
tract rescuers roars out of control and one of the
younger boys is accidentally burned to death. The
next death, that of Simon, is not an accident. He is
beaten to death when he rushes into the midst of
the ritual dance of the young savages. Ironically,
he has come to tell the boys that he has discovered
that the beast they fear is not real. Then Piggy, the
last intellectual link with civilization, is killed on
impulse by the sadistic Roger. Last, all semblance
of civilized restraint is cast-off as the now-savage
tribe of boys organizes itself to hunt down and kill
their erstwhile leader, Ralph, who had tried des¬
perately to prepare them to carry on in the fashion
expected of upper middle-class British youth.

That Golding intended Lord of the Flies as a
paradigm for modem civilization is concretely ev¬
ident at the conclusion of the work. During the fi¬
nal confrontation at the rock fort between Ralph
and Piggy and Jack and his tribe, the reader read¬
ily forgets that these individuals in conflict are not
adults. The manhunt for Ralph, too, seems relative
only to the world of adults. The reader is so in¬
clined to lose sight of the age of his characters that
Golding must remind that these participants are
pre-adolescents: The naval officer who interrupts
the deadly manhunt sees “A semicircle of little
boys, their bodies streaked with colored clay, sharp
sticks in hand....” Unlike that officer, the reader
knows that it was not “fun and games” of the boys
that the naval officer interrupted. The officer does


not realize—as the reader knows—that he has just
saved Ralph from a sacrificial death and the other
boys from becoming premeditated murderers. Nei¬
ther is the irony of the situation very subtle: The
boys have been “rescued” by an officer from a
British man-of-war, which will very shortly resume
its official activities as either hunter or hunted in
the deadly adult game of war.

Golding, then, in Lord of the Flies is asking
the question which continues as the major question
haunting the world today: How shall denizens of
the earth be rescued from our fears and our own
pursuers—ourselves? While Golding offers no
ready solutions to our dilemma, an understanding
of his parable yields other questions which may en¬
able readers to become seekers in the quest for a
moral world. Even if one disagrees with Golding’s
judgment of the nature of human beings and of hu¬
man society, one profits from his analysis of the
problems confronting people today....

Golding is a master at his trade and Lord of
the Flies has achieved critical acclaim as the best
of his works. Indeed, a dictionary of literary ter¬
minology might well be illustrated with specific ex¬
amples from this piece of prose. The development
of the several focal characters in this work is bril¬
liantly and concretely done. In addition, the omni¬
scient narrative technique, plotting, relating story
to setting and the use of irony, foreshadowing, and
certainly, symbolism are so carefully and con¬
cretely accomplished that the work can serve as an
invaluable teaching aid to prepare students to read
other literature with a degree of understanding far
beyond a simplistic knowledge of the surface
events of the story. Golding’s characterizations will
be used in this rationale to illustrate these techni¬
cal qualities of the novel.

A strength of Lord of the Flies lies in tech¬
niques of characterization. There are five major
characters who are developed as wholly-rounded
individuals whose actions and intensity show com¬
plex human motivation: Ralph, Jack, Roger, Simon
and Piggy. A study of these characterizations shows
the wide range of techniques for developing per¬
sona utilized by Golding and by other authors:

Ralph, the protagonist, is a rather befuddled
everyman. He is chosen for leadership by the group
for all the wrong reasons. Ralph does not seek the
leadership role; he is elected because he is older
(12 plus), somewhat larger, is attractive in personal
appearance and, most strikingly, he possesses the
conch shell which reminds the boys of the mega¬
phone with which their late adult supervisors di-


19 0


Novels for Students



Lord of the Flies


rected and instructed them. In the unsought lead¬
ership role Ralph demonstrates courage, intelli¬
gence and some diplomatic skill. On the negative
side he quickly becomes disillusioned with the de¬
mocratic process and without Piggy’s constant urg-
ings would have cast aside the chiefs role even be¬
fore Jack’s coup d’etat. Ralph also demonstrates
other weaknesses as he unthinkingly gives away
Piggy’s hated nickname and, more significantly, he
gets caught up in the mob psychology of the sav¬
age dance and takes part in the ritualistic murder
of Simon. Thus, by relating causes and effects,
Golding reveals Ralph’s change from a proper
British lad to group leader to his disenchantment
and finally to his becoming the object of the mur¬
derous hunt by the boys who once chose him as
their leader.

Jack, the antagonist, is developed as the force¬
ful villain. Outgoing, cocky and confident. Jack
marches his choir boys in military formation up the
beach to answer the call of the conch. Jack is a nat¬
ural leader who, except for his exploitative nature,
might have been a congealing force for good. In¬
stead, his lust for power precipitates the conflict
with Ralph and Piggy’s long-range planning for
rescue. To attain leadership. Jack caters to boyish
desires for ready delights and after he is assured
that his choir boys will follow in this new direc¬
tion, he resorts to intimidation to increase his fol¬
lowing. In Jack, Golding has developed a prototype
of the charismatic leader who gains adherents by
highlighting the fears and fulfilling the ephemeral
needs and desires of followers.

Roger, “the hangman’s horror,” is a stereo¬
typed character who does not change. He readily
sheds a thin veneer of civilization which has been
imposed upon him by the authority of the police¬
man and the law. So easily his arm loses the re¬
straints which had once prohibited him from hit¬
ting the littl’uns with tossed rocks to a point where
he can kill Piggy on impulse. It is but one more
small step for him to proclaim the ritual dance must
end in killing and to premeditate the murder of
Ralph.

Simon is the quintessential Christ-figure. A
thin, frail little boy, subject to fainting spells, he
alone has the mental acumen and the courage to go
onto the mountain and disprove the existence of the
“beast.” He is martyred for his efforts by the group
which no longer wishes to hear his “good news.”

Piggy, the pragmatic intellectual, is of neces¬
sity the most steadfast in motivation. He is tied to
civilization by his physical weaknesses. Over¬


weight, asthmatic, and completely dependent for
sight upon his spectacles, the life of the happy sav¬
age has no allure for him. Without the aids of civ¬
ilization, such as eye glasses and allergy shots, he
cannot long survive. Consequently, he must reject
the ephemeral allures offered by Jack and stead¬
fastly hold, and seek to hold Ralph, to maintaining
the smoke signal, his only hope for the aid and suc¬
cor of rescue. His steadfastness in this aim enables
him to call up the uncharacteristic courage to make
the last appeal to Jack and his tribe before the rock
fort because “right is right.” His plea is to no avail;
the sadistic Roger releases the boulder which
throws Piggy from the cliff to his death.

Another minor character, Percival Weems
Botts, is developed as a stereotype to demonstrate
the fragility of rote learning. This “little’un” who
can only recite his name and address as a response
soon forgets even that as all trappings of civiliza¬
tion are lost by the boys.

Thus, Golding’s techniques of characterization
afford superior examples of the writer’s craft and
apt material to use to help students learn to inter¬
pret authorial voice and to respond to a piece of lit¬
erature as a level beyond the denotative.

Lord of the Flies has earned for itself and its
author great critical acclaim. It has also been ex¬
tolled by teachers for the excitement it can engen¬
der in readers and as a work in which the motiva¬
tion of characters is readily understood by
adolescent readers. Despite these accolades for the
novel as a work of literary art and as a teaching
tool, Lord of the Flies has on occasion aroused the
ire of would-be censors.

Some have opposed the use of the novel in the
classroom because of the use of “vulgar” language.
Certain words, notably “sucks,” “ass,” and the
British slang word “bloody,” are used. It is patently
obvious that there is no prurient motivation behind
the author’s choice of these words. Not one of these
words is ever used outside of a context in which
the word appears to be quite naturally the word the
character would use. The choir boys may well sing
like “angels,” as is stated; nevertheless, these are
perfectly normal pre-adolescent boys. Given the
proclivities of such youth the world over, verisimil¬
itude would be lost had they, amongst themselves,
always spoken like angels.

The sexual symbolism of the killing of the sow
has also raised some puritanical brows. This vio¬
lent scene is described in terms which might well
be used to describe a rape. Such symbolism is fully
justified, however, if the author is to be allowed to


Volume 2


1 9 l



Lord of the Flies


make his point that the motivation of the boys, cast¬
ing away the cloak of civilization, is no longer
merely securing food. Rather, they have moved
from serving practical needs to an insane lust for
working their will upon other creatures. The next
step is the slaughter of their own kind.

Objection, too, has come upon that very point:
children killing children. One must remind those
who object to this violence that this piece of liter¬
ature is a parable. Children are specifically used to
show that even the innocence of childhood can be
corrupted by fears from within. Those who would
deny Golding this mode of establishing his theme
would deny to all authors the right to make their
point in an explicit fashion.

The most vociferous denunciation of Lord of
the Flies has been vocalized by those who have
misread the book to the point that they believe it
deals with Satanism. The symbolism of the title,
which is the English translation of the Greek word
“Beelzebub,” is surely being misinterpreted by
such folk. In fact, theologian Davis Anderson states
unequivocally that “Golding is a Christian writer.”
Anderson defines the central theme of Lord of the
Flies as a statement of what it is like to experience
the fall from innocence into sin and to experience
damnation. Thus, a theologian sees the novel as one
dealing with the Christian doctrine of original sin
and of the rupture of man’s relationship with God!
Consequently, one who would attack this novel as
an exercise in Satanism assuredly holds an inde¬
fensible premise.

Source: Paul Slayton, ‘Teaching Rationale for William
Golding’s Lord of the Flies,” in Censored Books: Critical
Viewpoints, Nicholas J. Karolides, Lee Burress, John M.
Kean, eds., The Scarecrow Press, Inc., 1993, pp. 351-57.

Carl Niemeyer

In the following excerpt, Niemeyer compares
Lord of the Flies to an earlier, utopian British chil¬
dren ’s novel, The Coral Island.

One interested in finding about Golding for
oneself should probably begin with Lord of the
Flies.... The story is simple. In a way not clearly
explained, a group of children, all boys, presum¬
ably evacuees in a future war, are dropped from a
plane just before it is destroyed, on to an uninhab¬
ited tropical island. The stage is thus set for a re¬
working of a favorite subject in children’s litera¬
ture: castaway children assuming adult respon¬
sibilities without adult supervision. Golding ex¬
pects his readers to recall the classic example of
such a book, R. M. Ballantyne’s The Coral Island


(1857), where the boys rise to the occasion and be¬
have as admirably as would adults. But in Lord of
the Flies everything goes wrong from the begin¬
ning. A few boys representing sanity and common
sense, led by Ralph and Piggy, see the necessity
for maintaining a signal fire to attract a rescue. But
they are thwarted by the hunters, led by red-haired
Jack, whose lust for blood is finally not to be sat¬
isfied by killing merely wild pigs. Only the timely
arrival of a British cruiser saves us from an ending
almost literally too horrible to think about. Since
Golding is using a naive literary form to express
sophisticated reflections on the nature of man and
society, and since he refers obliquely to Ballantyne
many times throughout the book, a glance at The
Coral Island is appropriate.

Ballantyne shipwrecks his three boys—Jack,
eighteen; Ralph, the narrator, aged fifteen; and Pe-
terkin Gay, a comic sort of boy, aged thirteen—
somewhere in the South Seas on an uninhabited
coral island. Jack is a natural leader, but both Ralph
and Peterkin have abilities valuable for survival.
Jack has the most common sense and foresight, but
Peterkin turns out to be a skillful killer of pigs, and
Ralph when later in the book he is temporarily sep¬
arated from his friends and alone on a schooner,
coolly navigates it back to Coral Island by dead
reckoning, a feat sufficiently impressive, if not
quite equal to Captain Bligh’s. The boys’ life on
the island is idyllic; and they are themselves with¬
out malice or wickedness, though there are a few
curious episodes in which Ballantyne seems to hint
at something he himself understands as little as do
his characters. One is Peterkin’s wanton killing of
an old sow, useless as food, which the boy ratio¬
nalizes by saying he needs leather for shoes. This
and one or two other passages suggest that Ballan¬
tyne was aware of some darker aspects of boyish
nature, but for the most part he emphasizes the par¬
adisiacal life of the happy castaways. Like Gold¬
ing’s, however, Ballantyne’s story raises the prob¬
lem of evil, but whereas Golding finds evil in the
boys’ own natures, it comes to Ballantyne’s boys
not from within themselves but from the outside
world. Tropical nature, to be sure, is kind, but the
men of this non-Christian world are bad. For ex¬
ample, the island is visited by savage cannibals, one
canoeful pursuing another, who fight a cruel and
bloody battle, observed by the horrified boys, and
then go away. A little later the island is again vis¬
ited, this time by pirates (i.e., white men who have
renounced or scorned their Christian heritage), who
succeed in capturing Ralph. In due time the pirates
are deservedly destroyed, and in the final episode


19 2


Novels for Students



Lord of the Flies


of the book the natives undergo an unmotivated
conversion to Christianity, which effects a total
change in their nature just in time to rescue the boys
from their clutches.

Thus Ballantyne’s view of man is seen to be
optimistic, like his view of English boys’ pluck and
resourcefulness, which subdues tropical islands as
triumphantly as England imposes empire and reli¬
gion on lawless breeds of men. Golding’s naval of¬
ficer, the deus ex machina of Lord of the Flies, is
only echoing Ballantyne when, perceiving dimly
that all has not gone well on the island, he says: “I
should have thought that a pack of British boys—
you’re all British aren’t you?—would have been
able to put up a better show than that—I mean—”

This is not the only echo of the older book.
Golding boldly calls his two chief characters Jack
and Ralph. He reproduces the comic Peterkin in the
person of Piggy. He has a wanton killing of a wild
pig, accomplished, as E. L. Epstein points out, “in
terms of sexual intercourse.” He uses a storm to
avert a quarrel between Jack and Ralph, as Bal¬
lantyne used a hurricane to rescue his boys from
death at the hands of cannibals. He emphasizes
physical cruelty but integrates it into his story, and
by making it a real if deplorable part of human, or
at least boyish, nature improves on Ballantyne,
whose descriptions of brutality—never of course
performed by the boys—are usually introduced
merely for their sensational effect. Finally, on the
last page Golding’s officer calls Ralph mildly to
task for not having organized things better.

“It was like that at first" said Ralph, “before things—”

He stopped.

“We were together then—”

The officer nodded helpfully.

“I know. Jolly good show. Like the Coral Island.”

Golding invokes Ballantyne, so that the kind
but uncomprehending adult, the instrument of sal¬
vation, may recall to the child who has just gone
through hell, the naivete of the child’s own early
innocence, now forever lost; but he suggests at the
same time the inadequacy of Ballantyne’s picture
of human nature in primitive surroundings.

Golding, then, regards Ballantyne’s book as a
badly falsified map of reality, yet the only map of
this particular reality that many of us have. Ralph
has it and, through harrowing experiences, replaces
it with a more accurate one. The naval officer,
though he should know better, since he is on the
scene and should not have to rely on memories of
his boyhood reading, has it, and it seems unlikely


that he is ever going to alter it, for his last recorded
action is to turn away from the boys and look at
his “trim” cruiser, in other words to turn away from
a revelation of the untidy human heart to look at
something manufactured, manageable, and solidly
useful.

Golding, who being a grammar-school teacher
should know boys well, gives a corrective of Bal¬
lantyne’s optimism. As he has explained, the book
is “an attempt to trace the defects of society back
to the defects of human nature.” These defects turn
out, on close examination, to result from the evil
of inadequacy and mistakenness. Evil is not the
positive and readily identifiable force it appears to
be when embodied in Ballantyne’s savages and pi¬
rates. Golding’s Ralph, for example, has real abil¬
ities, most conspicuous among them the gift of
leadership and a sense of responsibility toward the
“littluns.” Yet both are incomplete. “By now,”
writes Golding, “Ralph had no self-consciousness
in public thinking but would treat the day’s deci¬
sions as though he were playing chess.” Such de¬
tachment is obviously an important and valuable
quality in a leader, but significantly the next sen¬
tence reads: “The only trouble was that he would
never be a very good chess player.” Piggy on the
other hand no doubt would have been a good chess
player, for with a sense of responsibility still more
acute than Ralph’s he combines brains and com¬
mon sense. Physically, however, he is ludicrous—
fat, asthmatic, and almost blind without his specs.
He is forever being betrayed by his body. At his
first appearance he is suffering from diarrhoea; his
last gesture is a literally brainless twitch of the
limbs, “like a pig’s after it has been killed.” His
further defect is that he is powerless, except as he
works through Ralph. Though Piggy is the first to
recognize the value of the conch and even shows
Ralph how to blow it to summon the first assem¬
bly, he cannot sound it himself. And he lacks imag¬
ination. Scientifically minded as he is, he scorns
what is intangible and he dismisses the possibility
of ghosts or an imaginary beast. “’Cos things
wouldn’t make sense. Houses an’ streets, an’—
TV—they wouldn’t work.” Of course he is quite
right, save that he forgets he is now on an island
where the artifacts of the civilization he has always
known are meaningless.

It is another important character, Simon, who
understands that there may indeed be a beast, even
if not a palpable one—“maybe it’s only us.” The
scientist Piggy has recognized it is possible to be
frightened of people, but he finds this remark of Si¬
mon's dangerous nonsense. Still Simon is right, as


Volume 2


1 9 3



Lord of the Flies


we see from his interview with the sow’s head on
a stake, which is the lord of the flies. He is right
that the beast is in the boys themselves, and he
alone discovers that what has caused their terror is
in reality a dead parachutist ironically stifled in the
elaborate clothing worn to guarantee survival. But
Simon’s failure is the inevitable failure of the mys¬
tic—what he knows is beyond words; he cannot
impart his insights to others. Having an early
glimpse of the truth, he cannot tell it.

Simon became inarticulate in his effort to express
mankind’s essential illness. Inspiration came to him.

“What’s the dirtiest thing there is?”

As an answer Jack dropped into the uncomprehend¬
ing silence that followed it the one crude expressive
syllable. Release was like an orgasm. Those littluns
who had climbed back on the twister fell off again
and did not mind. The hunters were screaming with
delight.

Simon’s effort fell about him in ruins; the laughter
beat him cruelly and he shrank away defenseless to
his seat.

Mockery also greets Simon later when he
speaks to the lord of the flies, though this time it
is sophisticated, adult mockery:

“Fancy thinking the Beast was something you could
hunt and kill!” said the head. For a moment or two
the forest and all the other dimly appreciated places
echoed with the parody of laughter.

Tragically, when Simon at length achieves a
vision so clear that is is readily communicable he
is killed by the pig hunters in their insane belief
that he is the very evil which he alone has not only
understood but actually exorcised. Like the martyr,
he is killed for being precisely what he is not.

The inadequacy of Jack is the most serious of
all, and here perhaps if anywhere in the novel we
have a personification of absolute evil. Though he
is the most mature of the boys (he alone of all the
characters is given a last name), and though as head
of the choir he is the only one with any experience
of leadership, he is arrogant and lacking in Ralph’s
charm and warmth. Obsessed with the idea of hunt¬
ing, he organizes his choir members into a band of
killers. Ostensibly they are to kill pigs, but pigs
alone do not satisfy them, and pigs are in any event
not needed for food. The blood lust once aroused
demands nothing less than human blood. If Ralph
represents purely civil authority, backed only by
his own good will. Piggy’s wisdom, and the
crowd’s easy willingness to be ruled. Jack stands
for naked ruthless power, the police force or the
military force acting without restraint and gradu¬
ally absorbing the whole state into itself and anni¬


hilating what it cannot absorb. Yet even Jack is in¬
adequate. He is only a little boy after all, as we are
sharply reminded in a brilliant scene at the end of
the book, when we suddenly see him through the
eyes of the officer instead of through Ralph’s, and
he is, like all sheer power, anarchic. When Ralph
identifies himself to the officer as “boss,” Jack, who
has just all but murdered him, makes a move in dis¬
pute, but overawed at last by superior power, the
power of civilization and the British Navy, implicit
in the officer’s mere presence, he says nothing. He
is a villain (are his red hair and ugliness intended
to suggest that he is a devil?), but in our world of
inadequacies and imperfections even villainy does
not fulfill itself completely. If not rescued, the
hunters would have destroyed Ralph and made him,
like the sow, an offering to the beast; but the in¬
exorable logic of Ulysses makes us understand
that they would have proceeded thence to self-
destruction.

Then everything includes itself in power,

Power into will, will into appetite;

And appetite, an universal wolf.

So doubly seconded with will and power.

Must make perforce an universal prey.

And last eat up himself.

The distance we have travelled from Ballan-
tyne’s cheerful unrealities is both artistic and moral.
Golding is admittedly symbolic; Ballantyne pro¬
fessed to be telling a true story. Yet it is the sym¬
bolic tale that, at least for our times, carries con¬
viction. Golding’s boys, who choose to remember
nothing of their past before the plane accident; who,
as soon as Jack commands the choir to take off the
robes marked with the cross of Christianity, have
no trace of religion; who demand to be ruled and
are incapable of being ruled properly; who though
many of them were once choir boy’s (Jack could
sing C sharp) never sing a note on the island; in
whose minds the great tradition of Western culture
has left the titles of a few books for children, a
knowledge of the use of matches (but no matches),
and hazy memories of planes and TV sets—these
boys are more plausible than Ballantyne’s. His was
a world of blacks and whites: bad hurricanes, good
islands; good pigs obligingly allowing themselves
to be taken for human food, bad sharks disoblig¬
ingly taking human beings for shark food; good
Christians, bad natives; bad pirates, good boys. Of
the beast within, which demands blood sacrifice,
first a sow’s head, then a boy’s, Ballantyne has
some vague notion, but he cannot take it seriously.
Not only does Golding see the beast; he sees that
to keep it at bay we have civilization; but when by


19 4


Novels for Students



Lord of the Flies


some magic or accident civilization is abolished
and the human animal is left on his own, depen¬
dent upon his mere humanity, then being human is
not enough. The beast appears, though not neces¬
sarily spontaneously or inevitably, for it never rages
in Ralph or Piggy or Simon as it does in Roger or
Jack; but it is latent in all of them, in the signifi¬
cantly named Piggy, in Ralph, who sometimes en¬
vies the abandon of the hunters and who shares the
desire to “get a handful” of Robert’s “brown, vul¬
nerable flesh,” and even in Simon burrowing into
his private hiding place. After Simon’s death Jack
attracts all the boys but Ralph and the loyal Piggy
into his army. Then when Piggy is killed and Ralph
is alone, only civilization can save him. The timely
arrival of the British Navy is less theatrical than
logically necessary to make Golding’s point. For
civilization defeats the beast. It slinks back into the
jungle as the boys creep out to be rescued; but the
beast is real. It is there, and it may return.

Source: Carl Niemeyer, “The Coral Island Revisited,” in
College English, Vol. 22, No. 4, January, 1961, pp. 241-45.


Sources


James R. Baker, “The Decline of Lord of the Flies," South
Atlantic Quarterly, Vol. 69, Autumn, 1970, pp. 446-60.

Douglas A. Davis, “A Conversation with Golding,” New Re¬
public, May 4, 1963, pp. 28-30.

Bernard F. Dick, William Golding, revised edition, Twayne,
1987.

James J. Fahey, Pacific War Diary: 1942-1945, Houghton
Mifflin, 1963.

Martin Green, “Distaste for the Contemporary,” Nation, Vol.
190, May 21, 1960, pp. 451-54.

Frank Kermode, “The Novels of William Golding.” In In¬
ternational Literary Annual, Vol. Ill, 1961, pp. 11-29. Also
appears in shorter form in Baker & Ziegler (1964), pp. 203-
6 .

Patrick Reilly, ‘Lord of the Flies’: Fathers and Sons,
Twayne’s Masterwork Studies No. 106, 1992.

Kenneth Rexroth, Atlantic Monthly, May, 1965.

Claire Rosenfield, “’Men of Smaller Growth’: A Psycho¬
logical Analysis of William Golding’s Lord of the Flies," in
William Golding's “Lord of the Flies, ” A Casebook Edition,


edited by James R. Baker and Arthur P. Ziegler, Jr., Put¬
nam, 1964, pp. 261-76. Also appears in Leonard and Eleanor
Manheim, editors. Hidden Patterns: Studies in Psychoana¬
lytic Literary Criticism, Macmillan, 1966.


For Further Study


James R. Baker and Arthur P. Ziegler, Jr., editors, William
Golding's ‘Lord of the Flies, ’ A Casebook Edition: Text,
Notes, and Criticism, Putnam, 1964, esp. pp. ix-xxiv, 189-
291.

Includes the text of the novel, early critical articles
pro and con, two interviews with Golding, and a
checklist of other criticism.

C. B. Cox, review of Lord of the Flies, in Critical Quar¬
terly, Vol. 2, no. 2, Summer, 1960, pp. 112-17.

A contemporary review calling Lord of the Flies one
of the most important novels to be published in the
1950s.

James Gindin, William Golding, St. Martin’s, 1988.

Gindin provides a good discussion of Golding’s prose
techniques and the way he suggests abstract ideas
through his use of concrete detail.

G. C. Hemdl, “Golding and Salinger: A Clear Choice,”
Wiseman Review, No. 502, Winter, 1964-65, pp. 309-22.
Hemdl sees Golding coming out of a classical and
Christian tradition that implicitly honors social insti¬
tutions and refutes individualism.

John Peter, “The Fables of William Golding,” Kenyon Re¬
view, Vol. 19, Autumn, 1957, pp. 577-92. A section of this
essay appears in Baker & Ziegler, pp. 229-34.

Peter finds this article “important and influential in
attempting to define critical terms for an under¬
standing of Golding’s work.” Bernard F. Dick notes
that Golding himself especially liked this essay.

David Spitz, “Power and Authority: An Interpretation of
Golding’s ‘Lord of the Flies,’” in Antioch Review, Vol. 30,
no. 1, Spring, 1970, pp. 21-33.

A careful study of characterization in Golding’s
novel.

James Stem, “English Schoolboys in the Jungle,” in New
York Times Review of Books, October 23, 1995, p. 38.
Stem interprets the novel as social commentary.

Virginia Tiger, William Golding: The Dark Fields of Dis¬
covery, Calder & Boyars, 1974.

Tiger summarizes religious, political, psychological,
and anthropological interpretations while arguing
that the story’s structure “portrays its thematic mean¬
ing.”

Time, June 22, 1962, p. 64.

An article tracing the growing popularity in America
of Golding’s novel.


Volume 2


1 9 5




